<Author: Sheridan Le Fanu>
<Gender: M>
<Year: 1863>
<Source: HUM19UK>
<News Novel: 0>

We are going to talk, if you please, in the ensuing chapters, of what
was going on in Chapelizod about a hundred years ago. A hundred years,
to be sure, is a good while; but though fashions have changed, some old
phrases dropped out, and new ones come in; and snuff and hair-powder,
and sacques and solitaires quite passed away--yet men and women were men
and women all the same--as elderly fellows, like your humble servant,
who have seen and talked with rearward stragglers of that
generation--now all and long marched off--can testify, if they will.

In those days Chapelizod was about the gayest and prettiest of the
outpost villages in which old Dublin took a complacent pride. The
poplars which stood, in military rows, here and there, just showed a
glimpse of formality among the orchards and old timber that lined the
banks of the river and the valley of the Liffey, with a lively sort of
richness. The broad old street looked hospitable and merry, with steep
roofs and many coloured hall-doors. The jolly old inn, just beyond the
turnpike at the sweep of the road, leading over the buttressed bridge by
the mill, was first to welcome the excursionist from Dublin, under the
sign of the Phoenix. There, in the grand wainscoted back-parlour, with
'the great and good King William,' in his robe, garter, periwig, and
sceptre presiding in the panel over the chimneypiece, and confronting
the large projecting window, through which the river, and the daffodils,
and the summer foliage looked so bright and quiet, the Aldermen of
Skinner's Alley--a club of the 'true blue' dye, as old as the Jacobite
wars of the previous century--the corporation of shoemakers, or of
tailors, or the freemasons, or the musical clubs, loved to dine at the
stately hour of five, and deliver their jokes, sentiments, songs, and
wisdom, on a pleasant summer's evening. Alas! the inn is as clean gone
as the guests--a dream of the shadow of smoke.

Lately, too, came down the old 'Salmon House'--so called from the
blazonry of that noble fish upon its painted sign-board--at the other
end of the town, that, with a couple more, wheeled out at right angles
from the line of the broad street, and directly confronting the
passenger from Dublin, gave to it something of the character of a
square, and just left room for the high road and Martin's Row to slip
between its flank and the orchard that overtopped the river wall. Well!
it is gone. I blame nobody. I suppose it was quite rotten, and that the
rats would soon have thrown up their lease of it; and that it was taken
down, in short, chiefly, as one of the players said of 'Old Drury,' to
prevent the inconvenience of its coming down of itself. Still a peevish
but harmless old fellow--who hates change, and would wish things to stay
as they were just a little, till his own great change comes; who haunts
the places where his childhood was passed, and reverences the homeliest
relics of by-gone generations--may be allowed to grumble a little at the
impertinences of improving proprietors with a taste for accurate
parallelograms and pale new brick.

Then there was the village church, with its tower dark and rustling from
base to summit, with thick piled, bowering ivy. The royal arms cut in
bold relief in the broad stone over the porch--where, pray, is that
stone now, the memento of its old viceregal dignity? Where is the
elevated pew, where many a lord lieutenant, in point, and gold lace, and
thunder-cloud periwig, sate in awful isolation, and listened to orthodox
and loyal sermons, and took French rappee; whence too, he stepped forth
between the files of the guard of honour of the Royal Irish Artillery
from the barrack over the way, in their courtly uniform, white, scarlet,
and blue, cocked hats, and cues, and ruffles, presenting arms--into his
emblazoned coach and six, with hanging footmen, as wonderful as
Cinderella's, and out-riders out-blazing the liveries of the troops, and
rolling grandly away in sunshine and dust.

The 'Ecclesiastical Commissioners' have done their office here. The
tower, indeed, remains, with half its antique growth of ivy gone; but
the body of the church is new, and I, and perhaps an elderly fellow or
two more, miss the old-fashioned square pews, distributed by a
traditional tenure among the families and dignitaries of the town and
vicinage (who are they now?), and sigh for the queer, old, clumsy
reading-desk and pulpit, grown dearer from the long and hopeless
separation; and wonder where the tables of the Ten Commandments, in long
gold letters of Queen Anne's date, upon a vivid blue ground, arched
above, and flanking the communion-table, with its tall thin rails, and
fifty other things that appeared to me in my nonage, as stable as the
earth, and as sacred as the heavens, are gone to.

As for the barrack of the Royal Irish Artillery, the great gate leading
into the parade ground, by the river side, and all that, I believe the
earth, or rather that grim giant factory, which is now the grand feature
and centre of Chapelizod, throbbing all over with steam, and whizzing
with wheels, and vomiting pitchy smoke, has swallowed them up.

A line of houses fronting this--old familiar faces--still look blank and
regretfully forth, through their glassy eyes, upon the changed scene.
How different the company they kept some ninety or a hundred years ago!

Where is the mill, too, standing fast by the bridge, the manorial
appendage of the town, which I loved in my boyhood for its gaunt and
crazy aspect and dim interior, whence the clapper kept time mysteriously
to the drone of the mill-sluice? I think it is gone. Surely that
confounded thing can't be my venerable old friend in masquerade!

But I can't expect you, my reader--polite and patient as you manifestly
are--to potter about with me, all the summer day, through this
melancholy and mangled old town, with a canopy of factory soot between
your head and the pleasant sky. One glance, however, before you go, you
will vouchsafe at the village tree--that stalworth elm. It has not grown
an inch these hundred years. It does not look a day older than it did
fifty years ago, I can tell you. There he stands the same; and yet a
stranger in the place of his birth, in a new order of things, joyless,
busy, transformed Chapelizod, listening, as it seems to me, always to
the unchanged song and prattle of the river, with his reveries and
affections far away among by-gone times and a buried race. Thou hast a
story, too, to tell, thou slighted and solitary sage, if only the winds
would steal it musically forth, like the secret of Mildas from the
moaning reeds.

The palmy days of Chapelizod were just about a hundred years ago, and
those days--though I am jealous of their pleasant and kindly fame, and
specially for the preservation of the few memorials they have left
behind, were yet, I may say, in your ear, with all their colour and
adventure--perhaps, on the whole, more pleasant to read about, and dream
of, than they were to live in. Still their violence, follies, and
hospitalities, softened by distance, and illuminated with a sort of
barbaric splendour, have long presented to my fancy the glowing and
ever-shifting combinations upon which, as on the red embers, in a
winter's gloaming, I love to gaze, propping my white head upon my hand,
in a lazy luxury of reverie, from my own arm-chair, while they drop,
ever and anon, into new shapes, and silently tell their 'winter's
tales.'

When your humble servant, Charles de Cresseron, the compiler of this
narrative, was a boy some fourteen years old--how long ago precisely
that was, is nothing to the purpose, 'tis enough to say he remembers
what he then saw and heard a good deal better than what happened a week
ago--it came to pass that he was spending a pleasant week of his
holidays with his benign uncle and godfather, the curate of Chapelizod.
On the second day of his, or rather my sojourn (I take leave to return
to the first person), there was a notable funeral of an old lady. Her
name was Darby, and her journey to her last home was very considerable,
being made in a hearse, by easy stages, from her house of Lisnabane, in
the county of Sligo, to the church-yard of Chapelizod. There was a great
flat stone over that small parcel of the rector's freehold, which the
family held by a tenure, not of lives, but of deaths, renewable for
ever. So that my uncle, who was a man of an anxious temperament, had
little trouble in satisfying himself of the meerings and identity of
this narrow tenement, to which Lemuel Mattocks, the sexton, led him as
straight and confidently as he could have done to the communion-table.

My uncle, therefore, fiated the sexton's presentment, and the work
commenced forthwith. I don't know whether all boys have the same liking
for horrors which I am conscious of having possessed--I only know that I
liked the churchyard, and deciphering tombstones, and watching the
labours of the sexton, and hearing the old world village talk that often
got up over the relics.

When this particular grave was pretty nearly finished--it lay from east
to west--a lot of earth fell out at the northern side, where an old
coffin had lain, and good store of brown dust and grimy bones, and the
yellow skull itself came tumbling about the sexton's feet. These
fossils, after his wont, he lifted decently with the point of his
shovel, and pitched into a little nook beside the great mound of mould
at top.

'Be the powers o' war! here's a battered head-piece for yez,' said young
Tim Moran, who had picked up the cranium, and was eyeing it curiously,
turning it round the while.

'Show it here, Tim;' 'let me look,' cried two or three neighbours,
getting round as quickly as they could.

'Oh! murdher;' said one.

'Oh! be the powers o' Moll Kelly!' cried another.

'Oh! bloody wars!' exclaimed a third.

'That poor fellow got no chance for his life at all, at all!' said Tim.

'That was a bullet,' said one of them, putting his finger into a clean
circular aperture as large as a half-penny.

'An' look at them two cracks. Och, murther!'

'There's only one. Oh, I see you're right, two, begorra!'

'Aich o' them a wipe iv a poker.'

Mattocks had climbed nimbly to the upper level, and taking the skull in
his fist, turned it about this way and that, curiously. But though he
was no chicken, his memory did not go far enough back to throw any light
upon the matter.

'Could it be the Mattross that was shot in the year '90, as I often
heerd, for sthrikin' his captain?' suggested a by-stander.

'Oh! that poor fellow's buried round by the north side of the church,'
said Mattocks, still eyeing the skull. 'It could not be Counsellor
Gallagher, that was kilt in the jewel with Colonel Ruck--he was hot in
the head--bud it could not be--augh! not at all.'

'Why not, Misther Mattocks?'

'No, nor the Mattross neither. This, ye see, is a dhry bit o' the yard
here; there's ould Darby's coffin, at the bottom, down there, sound
enough to stand on, as you see, wid a plank; an' he was buried in the
year '93. Why, look at the coffin this skull belongs to, 'tid go into
powdher between your fingers; 'tis nothin' but tindher.'

'I believe you're right, Mr. Mattocks.'

'Phiat! to be sure. 'Tis longer undher ground by thirty years, good, or
more maybe.'

Just then the slim figure of my tall mild uncle, the curate, appeared,
and his long thin legs, in black worsted stockings and knee-breeches,
stepped reverently and lightly among the graves. The men raised their
hats, and Mattocks jumped lightly into the grave again, while my uncle
returned their salute with the sad sort of smile, a regretful kindness,
which he never exceeded, in these solemn precincts.

It was his custom to care very tenderly for the bones turned up by the
sexton, and to wait with an awful solicitude until, after the reading of
the funeral service, he saw them gently replaced, as nearly as might be,
in their old bed; and discouraging all idle curiosity or levity
respecting them, with a solemn rebuke, which all respected. Therefore it
was, that so soon as he appeared the skull was, in Hibernian phrase,
'dropt like a hot potato,' and the grave-digger betook himself to his
spade so nimbly.

'Oh! Uncle Charles,' I said, taking his hand, and leading him towards
the foot of the grave; 'such a wonderful skull has come up! It is shot
through with a bullet, and cracked with a poker besides.'

''Tis thrue for him, your raverence; he was murthered twiste over,
whoever he was--rest his sowl;' and the sexton, who had nearly completed
his work, got out of the grave again, with a demure activity, and
raising the brown relic with great reverence, out of regard for my good
uncle, he turned it about slowly before the eyes of the curate, who
scrutinised it, from a little distance, with a sort of melancholy
horror.

'Yes, Lemuel,' said my uncle, still holding my hand, ''twas undoubtedly
a murder; ay, indeed! He sustained two heavy blows, beside that gunshot
through the head.'

''Twasn't gunshot, Sir; why the hole 'id take in a grape-shot,' said an
old fellow, just from behind my uncle, in a pensioner's cocked hat,
leggings, and long old-world red frock-coat, speaking with a harsh reedy
voice, and a grim sort of reserved smile.

I moved a little aside, with a sort of thrill, to give him freer access
to my uncle, in the hope that he might, perhaps, throw a light upon the
history of this remarkable memorial. The old fellow had a rat-like gray
eye--the other was hid under a black patch--and there was a deep red
scar across his forehead, slanting from the patch that covered the
extinguished orb. His face was purplish, the tinge deepening towards the
lumpish top of his nose, on the side of which stood a big wart, and he
carried a great walking-cane over his shoulder, and bore, as it seemed
to me, an intimidating, but caricatured resemblance to an old portrait
of Oliver Cromwell in my Whig grandfather's parlour.

'You don't think it a bullet wound, Sir?' said my uncle, mildly, and
touching his hat--for coming of a military stock himself, he always
treated an old soldier with uncommon respect.

'Why, please your raverence,' replied the man, reciprocating his
courtesy; 'I know it's not.'

'And what is it, then, my good man?' interrogated the sexton, as one
in authority, and standing on his own dunghill.

'The trepan,' said the fogey, in the tone in which he'd have cried
'attention' to a raw recruit, without turning his head, and with a
scornful momentary skew-glance from his gray eye.

'And do you know whose skull that was, Sir?' asked the curate.

'Ay do I, Sir, well,' with the same queer smile, he answered. 'Come,
now, you're a grave-digger, my fine fellow,' he continued, accosting the
sexton cynically; 'how long do you suppose that skull's been under
ground?'

'Long enough; but not so long, my fine fellow, as yours has been above
ground.'

'Well, you're right there, for I seen him buried,' and he took the
skull from the sexton's hands; 'and I'll tell you more, there was some
dry eyes, too, at his funeral--ha, ha, ha!'

'You were a resident in the town, then?' said my uncle, who did not like
the turn his recollections were taking.

'Ay, Sir, that I was,' he replied; 'see that broken tooth, there--I
forgot 'twas there--and the minute I seen it, I remembered it like this
morning--I could swear to it--when he laughed; ay, and that sharp corner
to it--hang him,' and he twirled the loose tooth, the last but two of
all its fellows, from' its socket, and chucked it into the grave.

'And were you--you weren't in the army, then?' enquired the curate,
who could not understand the sort of scoffing dislike he seemed to bear
it.

'Be my faith I was so, Sir--the Royal Irish Artillery,' replied he,
promptly.

'And in what capacity?' pursued his reverence.

'Drummer,' answered the mulberry-faced veteran.

'Ho!--Drummer? That's a good time ago, I dare say,' said my uncle,
looking on him reflectively.

'Well, so it is, not far off fifty years,' answered he. 'He was a
hard-headed codger, he was; but you see the sprig of shillelagh was too
hard for him--ha, ha, ha!' and he gave the skull a smart knock with his
walking-cane, as he grinned at it and wagged his head.

'Gently, gently, my good man,' said the curate, placing his hand hastily
upon his arm, for the knock was harder than was needed for the purpose
of demonstration.

'You see, Sir, at that time, our Colonel-in-Chief was my Lord
Blackwater,' continued the old soldier, 'not that we often seen him, for
he lived in France mostly; the Colonel-en-Second was General
Chattesworth, and Colonel Stafford was Lieutenant-Colonel, and under him
Major O'Neill; Captains, four--Cluffe, Devereux, Barton, and Burgh:
First Lieutenants--Puddock, Delany, Sackville, and Armstrong; Second
Lieutenants--Salt; Barber, Lillyman, and Pringle; Lieutenant
Fireworkers--O'Flaherty--'

'I beg your pardon,' interposed my uncle, 'Fireworkers, did you say?'

'Yes, Sir.'

'And what, pray, does a Lieutenant Fireworker mean?'

'Why, law bless you, Sir! a Fireworker! 'twas his business to see that
the men loaded, sarved, laid, and fired the gun all right. But that
doesn't signify; you see this old skull, Sir: well, 'twas a nine days'
wonder, and the queerest business you ever heerd tell of. Why, Sir, the
women was frightened out of their senses, an' the men puzzled out o'
their wits--they wor--ha, ha, ha! an' I can tell you all about it--a
mighty black and bloody business it was--'

'I--I beg your pardon, Sir: but I think--yes--the funeral has arrived;
and for the present, I must bid you good-morning.'

And so my uncle hurried to the church, where he assumed his gown, and
the solemn rite proceeded.

When all was over, my uncle, after his wont, waited until he had seen
the disturbed remains re-deposited decently in their place; and then,
having disrobed, I saw him look with some interest about the
church-yard, and I knew 'twas in quest of the old soldier.

'I saw him go away during the funeral,' I said.

'Ay, the old pensioner,' said my uncle, peering about in quest of him.

And we walked through the town, and over the bridge, and we saw nothing
of his cocked hat and red single-breasted frock, and returned rather
disappointed to tea.

I ran into the back room which commanded the church-yard in the hope of
seeing the old fellow once more, with his cane shouldered, grinning
among the tombstones in the evening sun. But there was no sign of him,
or indeed of anyone else there. So I returned, just as my uncle, having
made the tea, shut down the lid of his silver tea-pot with a little
smack; and with a kind but absent smile upon me, he took his book, sat
down and crossed one of his thin legs over the other, and waited
pleasantly until the delightful infusion should be ready for our lips,
reading his old volume, and with his disengaged hand gently stroking his
long shin-bone.

In the meantime, I, who thirsted more for that tale of terror which the
old soldier had all but begun, of which in that strangely battered skull
I had only an hour ago seen face to face so grizzly a memento, and of
which in all human probability I never was to hear more, looked out
dejectedly from the window, when, whom should I behold marching up the
street, at slow time, towards the Salmon House, but the identical old
soldier, cocked-hat, copper nose, great red single-breasted coat with
its prodigious wide button-holes, leggings, cane, and all, just under
the village tree.

'Here he is, oh! Uncle Charles, here he comes,' I cried.

'Eh, the soldier, is he?' said my uncle, tripping in the carpet in his
eagerness, and all but breaking the window.

'So it is, indeed; run down, my boy, and beg him to come up.'

But by the time I had reached the street, which you may be sure was not
very long, I found my uncle had got the window up and was himself
inviting the old boy, who having brought his left shoulder forward,
thanked the curate, saluting soldier-fashion, with his hand to his hat,
palm foremost. I've observed, indeed, than those grim old campaigners
who have seen the world, make it a principle to accept anything in the
shape of a treat. If it's bad, why, it costs them nothing; and if good,
so much the better.

So up he marched, and into the room with soldierly self-possession, and
being offered tea, preferred punch, and the ingredients were soon on the
little round table by the fire, which, the evening being sharp, was
pleasant; and the old fellow being seated, he brewed his nectar, to his
heart's content; and as we sipped our tea in pleased attention, he,
after his own fashion, commenced the story, to which I listened with an
interest which I confess has never subsided.

Many years after, as will sometimes happen, a flood of light was
unexpectedly poured over the details of his narrative; on my coming into
possession of the diary, curiously minute, and the voluminous
correspondence of Rebecca, sister to General Chattesworth, with whose
family I had the honour to be connected. And this journal, to me, with
my queer cat-like affection for this old village, a perfect
treasure--and the interminable bundles of letters, sorted and arranged
so neatly, with little abstracts of their contents in red ink, in her
own firm thin hand upon the covers, from all and to all manner of
persons--for the industrious lady made fair copies of all the letters
she wrote--formed for many years my occasional, and always pleasant
winter night's reading.

I wish I could infuse their spirit into what I am going to tell, and
above all that I could inspire my readers with ever so little of the
peculiar interest with which the old town has always been tinted and
saddened to my eye. My boyish imagination, perhaps, kindled all the more
at the story, by reason of it being a good deal connected with the
identical old house in which we three--my dear uncle, my idle self, and
the queer old soldier--were then sitting. But wishes are as vain as
regrets; so I'll just do my best, bespeaking your attention, and
submissively abiding your judgment.






A.D. 1767--in the beginning of the month of May--I mention it because,
as I said, I write from memoranda, an awfully dark night came down on
Chapelizod and all the country round.

I believe there was no moon, and the stars had been quite put out under
the wet 'blanket of the night,' which impenetrable muffler overspread
the sky with a funereal darkness.

There was a little of that sheet-lightning early in the evening, which
betokens sultry weather. The clouds, column after column, came up
sullenly over the Dublin mountains, rolling themselves from one horizon
to the other into one black dome of vapour, their slow but steady motion
contrasting with the awful stillness of the air. There was a weight in
the atmosphere, and a sort of undefined menace brooding over the little
town, as if unseen crime or danger--some mystery of iniquity--was
stealing into the heart of it, and the disapproving heavens scowled a
melancholy warning.

That morning old Sally, the rector's housekeeper, was disquieted. She
had dreamed of making the great four-post, state bed, with the dark
green damask curtains--a dream that betokened some coming trouble--it
might, to be sure, be ever so small--(it had once come with no worse
result than Dr. Walsingham's dropping his purse, containing something
under a guinea in silver, over the side of the ferry boat)--but again it
might be tremendous. The omen hung over them doubtful.

A large square letter, with a great round seal, as big as a crown piece,
addressed to the Rev. Hugh Walsingham, Doctor of Divinity, at his house,
by the bridge, in Chapelizod, had reached him in the morning, and
plainly troubled him. He kept the messenger a good hour awaiting his
answer; and, just at two o'clock, the same messenger returned with a
second letter--but this time a note sufficed for reply. ''Twill seem
ungracious,' said the doctor, knitting his brows over his closed folio
in the study; 'but I cannot choose but walk clear in my calling before
the Lord. How can I honestly pronounce hope, when in my mind there is
nothing but fear--let another do it if he see his way--I do enough in
being present, as 'tis right I should.'

It was, indeed, a remarkably dark night--a rush and downpour of rain!
The doctor stood just under the porch of the stout brick house--of King
William's date, which was then the residence of the worthy rector of
Chapelizod--with his great surtout and cape on--his leggings buttoned
up--and his capacious leather 'overalls' pulled up and strapped over
these--and his broad-leafed hat tied down over his wig and ears with a
mighty silk kerchief. I dare say he looked absurd enough--but it was the
women's doing--who always, upon emergencies, took the doctor's wardrobe
in hand. Old Sally, with her kind, mild, grave face, and gray locks,
stood modestly behind in the hall; and pretty Lilias, his only child,
gave him her parting kiss, and her last grand charge about his shoes and
other exterior toggery, in the porch; and he patted her cheek with a
little fond laugh, taking old John Tracy's, the butler's, arm. John
carried a handsome horn-lantern, which flashed now on a roadside
bush--now on the discoloured battlements of the bridge--and now on a
streaming window. They stepped out--there were no umbrellas in those
days--splashing among the wide and widening pools; while Sally and
Lilias stood in the porch, holding candles for full five minutes after
the doctor and his 'Jack-o'-the-lantern,' as he called honest John,
whose arm and candle always befriended him in his night excursions, had
got round the corner.

Through the back bow-window of the Phoenix, there pealed forth--faint in
the distance and rain--a solemn royal ditty, piped by the tuneful
Aldermen of Skinner's Alley, and neither unmusical nor somehow
uncongenial with the darkness, and the melancholy object of the doctor's
walk, the chant being rather monastic, wild, and dirge-like. It was a
quarter past ten, and no other sound of life or human neighbourhood was
stirring. If secrecy were an object, it was well secured by the sable
sky, and the steady torrent which rolled down with electric weight and
perpendicularity, making all nature resound with one long
hush--sh--sh--sh--sh--deluging the broad street, and turning the
channels and gutters into mimic mill-streams which snorted and hurtled
headlong through their uneven beds, and round the corners towards the
turbid Liffey, which, battered all over with rain, muddy, and sullen,
reeled its way towards the sea, rolling up to the heavens an aspect
black as their own.

As they passed by the Phoenix (a little rivulet, by-the-bye, was
spouting down from the corner of the sign; and indeed the night was such
as might well have caused that suicidal fowl to abandon all thoughts of
self-incremation, and submit to an unprecedented death by drowning),
there was no idle officer, or lounging waiter upon the threshold.
Military and civilians were all snug in their quarters that night; and
the inn, except for the 'Aldermen' in the back parlour, was doing no
business. The door was nearly closed, and only let out a tall, narrow
slice of candle-light upon the lake of mud, over every inch of which the
rain was drumming.

The doctor's lantern glided by--and then across the street--and so
leisurely along the foot-way, by the range of lightless hall doors
towards the Salmon House, also dark; and so, sharp round the corner, and
up to the church-yard gate, which stood a little open, as also the
church door beyond, as was evidenced by the feeble glow of a lantern
from within.

I dare say old Bob Martin, the sexton, and grave Mr. Irons, the clerk,
were reassured when they heard the cheery voice of the rector hailing
them by name. There were now three candles in church; but the edifice
looked unpleasantly dim, and went off at the far end into total
darkness. Zekiel Irons was a lean, reserved fellow, with a black wig and
blue chin, and something shy and sinister in his phiz. I don't think he
had entertained honest Bob with much conversation from those thin lips
of his during their grizzly tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte among the black windows and
the mural tablets that overhung the aisle.

But the rector had lots to say--though deliberately and gravely, still
the voice was genial and inspiring--and exorcised the shadows that had
been gathering stealthily around the lesser Church functionaries. Mrs.
Irons's tooth, he learned, was still bad; but she was no longer troubled
with 'that sour humour in her stomach.' There were sour humours, alas!
still remaining--enough, and to spare, as the clerk knew to his cost.
Bob Martin thanked his reverence; the cold rheumatism in his hip was
better.' Irons, the clerk, replied, 'he had brought two prayer-books.'
Bob averred 'he could not be mistaken; the old lady was buried in the
near-vault; though it was forty years before, he remembered it like last
night. They changed her into her lead coffin in the vault--he and the
undertaker together--her own servants would not put a hand to her. She
was buried in white satin, and with her rings on her fingers. It was her
fancy, and so ordered in her will. They said she was mad. He'd know her
face again if he saw her. She had a long hooked nose; and her eyes were
open. For, as he was told, she died in her sleep, and was quite cold and
stiff when they found her in the morning. He went down and saw the
coffin to-day, half an hour after meeting his reverence.'

The rector consulted his great warming-pan of a watch. It was drawing
near eleven. He fell into a reverie, and rambled slowly up and down the
aisle, with his hands behind his back, and his dripping hat in them,
swinging nearly to the flags,--now lost in the darkness--now emerging
again, dim, nebulous, in the foggy light of the lanterns. When this
clerical portrait came near, he was looking down, with gathered brows,
upon the flags, moving his lips and nodding, as if counting them, as was
his way. The doctor was thinking all the time upon the one text:--Why
should this livid memorial of two great crimes be now disturbed, after
an obscurity of twenty-one years, as if to jog the memory of scandal,
and set the great throat of the monster baying once more at the old
midnight horror?

And as for that old house at Ballyfermot, why any one could have looked
after it as well as he. 'Still he must live somewhere, and certainly
this little town is quieter than the city, and the people, on the whole,
very kindly, and by no means curious.' This latter was a mistake of the
doctor's, who, like other simple persons, was fond of regarding others
as harmless repetitions of himself. 'And his sojourn will be,' he says,
'but a matter of weeks; and the doctors mind wandered back again to the
dead, and forward to the remoter consequences of his guilt, so he heaved
a heavy, honest sigh, and lifted up his head and slackened his pace for
a little prayer, and with that there came the rumble of wheels to the
church door.






Three vehicles with flambleaux, and the clang and snorting of horses
came close to the church porch, and there appeared suddenly, standing
within the disc of candle-light at the church door, before one would
have thought there was time, a tall, very pale, and peculiar looking
young man, with very large, melancholy eyes, and a certain cast of evil
pride in his handsome face.

John Tracy lighted the wax candles which he had brought, and Bob Martin
stuck them in the sockets at either side of the cushion, on the ledge of
the pew, beside the aisle, where the prayer-book lay open at 'the burial
of the dead,' and the rest of the party drew about the door, while the
doctor was shaking hands very ceremoniously with that tall young man,
who had now stepped into the circle of light, with a short, black mantle
on, and his black curls uncovered, and a certain air of high breeding in
his movements. 'He reminded me painfully of him who is gone, whom we
name not,' said the doctor to pretty Lilias, when he got home; he has
his pale, delicately-formed features, with a shadow of his evil
passions too, and his mother's large, sad eyes.'

And an elderly clergyman, in surplice, band, and white wig, with a hard,
yellow, furrowed face, hovered in, like a white bird of night, from the
darkness behind, and was introduced to Dr. Walsingham, and whispered for
a while to Mr. Irons, and then to Bob Martin, who had two short forms
placed transversely in the aisle to receive what was coming, and a
shovel full of earth--all ready. So, while the angular clergyman ruffled
into the front of the pew, with Irons on one side, a little in the rear,
both books open; the plump little undertaker, diffusing a steam from his
moist garments, making a prismatic halo round the candles and lanterns,
as he moved successively by them, whispered a word or two to the young
gentleman [Mr. Mervyn, the doctor called him], and Mr. Mervyn
disappeared. Dr. Walsingham and John Tracy got into contiguous seats,
and Bob Martin went out to lend a hand. Then came the shuffling of feet,
and the sound of hard-tugging respiration, and the suppressed energetic
mutual directions of the undertaker's men, who supported the ponderous
coffin. How much heavier, it always seems to me, that sort of load than
any other of the same size!

A great oak shell: the lid was outside in the porch, Mr. Tressels was
unwilling to screw it down, having heard that the entrance to the vault
was so narrow, and apprehending it might be necessary to take the coffin
out. So it lay its length with a dull weight on the two forms. The lead
coffin inside, with its dusty black velvet, was plainly much older.
There was a plate on it with two bold capitals, and a full stop after
each, thus;--

     R. D. obiit May 11th, A.D. 1746. Ã¦tat 38.

And above this plain, oval plate was a little bit of an ornament no
bigger than a sixpence. John Tracy took it for a star, Bob Martin said
he knew it to be a Freemason's order, and Mr. Tressels, who almost
overlooked it, thought it was nothing better than a fourpenny cherub.
But Mr. Irons, the clerk, knew that it was a coronet; and when he heard
the other theories thrown out, being a man of few words he let them have
it their own way, and with his thin lips closed, with their changeless
and unpleasant character of an imperfect smile, he coldly kept this
little bit of knowledge to himself.

Earth to earth (rumble), dust to dust (tumble), ashes to ashes (rattle).

And now the coffin must go out again, and down to its final abode.

The flag that closed the entrance of the vault had been removed. But
the descent of Avernus was not facile, the steps being steep and broken,
and the roof so low. Young Mervyn had gone down the steps to see it duly
placed; a murky, fiery light; came up, against which the descending
figures looked black and cyclopean.

Dr. Walsingham offered his brother-clergyman his hospitalities; but
somehow that cleric preferred returning to town for his supper and his
bed. Mervyn also excused himself. It was late, and he meant to stay that
night at the Phoenix, and to-morrow designed to make his compliments
in person to Dr. Walsingham. So the bilious clergyman from town climbed
into the vehicle in which he had come, and the undertaker and his troop
got into the hearse and the mourning coach and drove off demurely
through the town; but once a hundred yards or so beyond the turnpike, at
such a pace that they overtook the rollicking cortÃ¨ge of the Alderman
of Skinner's Alley upon the Dublin road, all singing and hallooing, and
crowing and shouting scraps of banter at one another, in which
recreations these professional mourners forthwith joined them; and they
cracked screaming jokes, and drove wild chariot races the whole way into
town, to the terror of the divine, whose presence they forgot, and whom,
though he shrieked from the window, they never heard, until getting out,
when the coach came to a stand-still, he gave Mr. Tressels a piece of
his mind, and that in so alarming a sort, that the jolly undertaker,
expressing a funereal concern at the accident, was obliged to explain
that all the noise came from the scandalous party they had so
unfortunately overtaken, and that 'the drunken blackguards had lashed
and frightened his horses to a runaway pace, singing and hallooing in
the filthy way he heard, it being a standing joke among such roisterers
to put quiet tradesmen of his melancholy profession into a false and
ridiculous position.' He did not convince, but only half puzzled the
ecclesiastic, who muttering, 'credat JudÃ¦us,' turned his back upon Mr.
Tressels, with an angry whisk, without bidding him good-night.

Dr. Walsingham, with the aid of his guide, in the meantime, had reached
the little garden in front of the old house, and the gay tinkle of a
harpsichord and the notes of a sweet contralto suddenly ceased as he did
so; and he said--smiling in the dark, in a pleasant soliloquy, for he
did not mind John Tracy,--old John was not in the way--'She always hears
my step--always--little Lily, no matter how she's employed,' and the
hall-door opened, and a voice that was gentle, and yet somehow very
spirited and sweet, cried a loving and playful welcome to the old man.








The morning was fine--the sun shone out with a yellow splendour--all
nature was refreshed--a pleasant smell rose up from tree, and flower,
and earth. The now dry pavement and all the row of village windows were
glittering merrily--the sparrows twittered their lively morning gossip
among the thick ivy of the old church tower--here and there the village
cock challenged his neighbour with high and vaunting crow, and the bugle
notes soared sweetly into the air from the artillery ground beside the
river.

Moore, the barber, was already busy making his morning circuit, servant
men and maids were dropping in and out at the baker's, and old Poll
Delany, in her weather-stained red hood, and neat little Kitty Lane,
with her bright young careful face and white basket, were calling at the
doors of their customers with new laid eggs. Through half-opened hall
doors you might see the powdered servant, or the sprightly maid in her
mob-cap in hot haste steaming away with the red japanned 'tea kitchen'
into the parlour. The town of Chapelizod, in short, was just sitting
down to its breakfast.

Mervyn, in the meantime, had had his solitary meal in the famous back
parlour of the Phoenix, where the newspapers lay, and all comers were
welcome. He was by no means a bad hero to look at, if such a thing were
needed. His face was pale, melancholy, statuesque--and his large
enthusiastic eyes, suggested a story and a secret--perhaps a horror.
Most men, had they known all, would have wondered with good Doctor
Walsingham, why, of all places in the world, he should have chosen the
little town where he now stood for even a temporary residence. It was
not a perversity, but rather a fascination. His whole life had been a
flight and a pursuit--a vain endeavour to escape from the evil spirit
that pursued him--and a chase of a chimera.

He was standing at the window, not indeed enjoying, as another man
might, the quiet verdure of the scene, and the fragrant air, and all the
mellowed sounds of village life, but lost in a sad and dreadful reverie,
when in bounced little red-faced bustling Dr. Toole--the joke and the
chuckle with which he had just requited the fat old barmaid still
ringing in the passage--'Stay there, sweetheart,' addressed to a dog
squeezing by him, and which screeched out as he kicked it neatly round
the door-post.

'Hey, your most obedient, Sir,' cried the doctor, with a short but grand
bow, affecting surprise, though his chief object in visiting the back
parlour at that moment was precisely to make a personal inspection of
the stranger. 'Pray, don't mind me, Sir,--your--ho! Breakfast ended, eh?
Coffee not so bad, Sir; rather good coffee, I hold it, at the Phoenix.
Cream very choice, Sir?--I don't tell 'em so though (a wink); it might
not improve it, you know. I hope they gave you--eh?--eh? (he peeped into
the cream-ewer, which he turned towards the light, with a whisk). And no
disputing the eggs--forty-eight hens in the poultry yard, and ninety
ducks in Tresham's little garden, next door to Sturk's. They make a
precious noise, I can tell you, when it showers. Sturk threatens to
shoot 'em. He's the artillery surgeon here; and Tom Larkin said, last
night, it's because they only dabble and quack--and two of a trade, you
know--ha! ha! ha! And what a night we had--dark as Erebus--pouring like
pumps, by Jove. I'll remember it, I warrant you. Out on business--a
medical man, you know, can't always choose--and near meeting a bad
accident too. Anything in the paper, eh? ho! I see, Sir, haven't read
it. Well, and what do you think--a queer night for the purpose, eh?
you'll say--we had a funeral in the town last night, Sir--some one from
Dublin. It was Tressel's men came out. The turnpike rogue--just round
the corner there--one of the talkingest gossips in the town--and a
confounded prying, tattling place it is, I can tell you--knows the
driver; and Bob Martin, the sexton, you know--tells me there were two
parsons, no less--hey! Cauliflowers in season, by Jove. Old Dr.
Walsingham, our rector, a pious man, Sir, and does a world of good--that
is to say, relieves half the blackguards in the parish--ha! ha! when
we're on the point of getting rid of them--but means well, only he's a
little bit lazy, and queer, you know; and that rancid, raw-boned parson,
Gillespie--how the plague did they pick him up?--one of the mutes told
Bob 'twas he. He's from Donegal; I know all about him; the sourest dog I
ever broke bread with--and mason, if you please, by Jove--a prince
pelican! He supped at the Grand Lodge after labour, one night--you're
not a mason, I see; tipt you the sign--and his face was so pinched, and
so yellow, by Jupiter, I was near squeezing it into the punch-bowl for a
lemon--ha! ha! hey?'

Mervyn's large eyes expressed a well-bred surprise. Dr. Toole paused for
nearly a minute, as if expecting something in return; but it did not
come.

So the doctor started afresh, never caring for Mervyn's somewhat
dangerous looks.

'Mighty pretty prospects about here, Sir. The painters come out by
dozens in the summer, with their books and pencils, and scratch away
like so many Scotchmen. Ha! ha! ha! If you draw, Sir, there's one
prospect up the river, by the mills--upon my conscience--but you don't
draw?'

No answer.

'A little, Sir, maybe? Just for a maggot, I'll wager--like my good
lady, Mrs. Toole.' A nearer glance at his dress had satisfied Toole that
he was too much of a maccaroni for an artist, and he was thinking of
placing him upon the lord lieutenant's staff. 'We've capital horses
here, if you want to go on to Leixlip,' (where--this between ourselves
and the reader--during the summer months His Excellency and Lady
Townshend resided, and where, the old newspapers tell us, they 'kept a
public day every Monday,' and he 'had a levÃ©e, as usual, every
Thursday.') But this had no better success.

'If you design to stay over the day, and care for shooting, we'll have
some ball practice on Palmerstown fair-green to-day. Seven baronies to
shoot for ten and five guineas. One o'clock, hey?'

At this moment entered Major O'Neill, of the Royal Irish Artillery, a
small man, very neatly got up, and with a decidedly Milesian cast of
countenance, who said little, but smiled agreeably--

'Gentlemen, your most obedient. Ha, doctor; how goes it?--anything
new--anything on the Freeman?'

Toole had scanned that paper, and hummed out, as he rumpled it
over,--'nothing--very--particular. Here's Lady Moira's ball: fancy
dresses--all Irish; no masks; a numerous appearance of the nobility and
gentry--upwards of five hundred persons. A good many of your corps
there, major?'

'Ay, Lord Blackwater, of course, and the general, and Devereux, and
little Puddock, and----'

'Sturk wasn't,' with a grin, interrupted Toole, who bore that
practitioner no good-will. 'A gentleman robbed, by two foot-pads, on
Chapelizod-road, on Wednesday night, of his watch and money, together
with his hat, wig and cane, and lies now in a dangerous state, having
been much abused; one of them dressed in an old light-coloured coat,
wore a wig. By Jupiter, major, if I was in General Chattesworth's place,
with two hundred strapping fellows at my orders, I'd get a commission
from Government to clear that road. It's too bad, Sir, we can't go in
and out of town, unless in a body, after night-fall, but at the risk of
our lives. [The convivial doctor felt this public scandal acutely.] The
bloody-minded miscreants, I'd catch every living soul of them, and burn
them alive in tar-barrels. By Jove! here's old Joe Napper, of
Dirty-lane's dead. Plenty of dry eyes after him. And stay, here's
another row.' And so he read on.

In the meantime, stout, tightly-braced Captain Cluffe of the same corps,
and little dark, hard-faced, and solemn Mr. Nutter, of the Mills, Lord
Castlemallard's agents, came in, and half a dozen more, chiefly members
of the club, which met by night in the front parlour on the left,
opposite the bar, where they entertained themselves with agreeable
conversation, cards, backgammon, draughts, and an occasional song by Dr.
Toole, who was a florid tenor, and used to give them, 'While gentlefolks
strut in silver and satins,' or 'A maiden of late had a merry design,'
or some other such ditty, with a recitation by plump little
stage-stricken Ensign Puddock, who, in 'thpite of hith lithp,' gave
rather spirited imitations of some of the players--Mossop, Sheridan,
Macklin, Barry, and the rest. So Mervyn, the stranger, by no means
affecting this agreeable society, took his cane and cocked-hat, and went
out--the dark and handsome apparition--followed by curious glances from
two or three pairs of eyes, and a whispered commentary and criticism
from Toole.

So, taking a meditative ramble in 'His Majesty's Park, the Phoenix;'
and passing out at Castleknock gate, he walked up the river, between the
wooded slopes, which make the valley of the Liffey so pleasant and
picturesque, until he reached the ferry, which crossing, he at the other
side found himself not very far from Palmerstown, through which village
his return route to Chapelizod lay.






There were half-a-dozen carriages, and a score of led horses outside the
fair-green, a precious lot of ragamuffins, and a good resort to the
public-house opposite; and the gate being open, the artillery band,
rousing all the echoes round with harmonious and exhilarating thunder,
within--an occasional crack of a 'Brown Bess,' with a puff of white
smoke over the hedge, being heard, and the cheers of the spectators, and
sometimes a jolly chorus of many-toned laughter, all mixed together, and
carried on with a pleasant running hum of voices--Mervyn, the stranger,
reckoning on being unobserved in the crowd, and weary of the very
solitude he courted, turned to his right, and so found himself upon the
renowned fair-green of Palmerstown.

It was really a gay rural sight. The circular target stood, with its
bright concentric rings, in conspicuous isolation, about a hundred yards
away, against the green slope of the hill. The competitors in their best
Sunday suits, some armed with muskets and some with fowling pieces--for
they were not particular--and with bunches of ribbons fluttering in
their three-cornered hats, and sprigs of gay flowers in their breasts,
stood in the foreground, in an irregular cluster, while the spectators,
in pleasant disorder, formed two broad, and many-coloured parterres,
broken into little groups, and separated by a wide, clear sweep of green
sward, running up from the marksmen to the target.

In the luminous atmosphere the men of those days showed bright and gay.
Such fine scarlet and gold waistcoats--such sky-blue and silver--such
pea-green lutestrings--and pink silk linings--and flashing buckles--and
courtly wigs--or becoming powder--went pleasantly with the brilliant
costume of the stately dames and smiling lasses. There was a pretty
sprinkling of uniforms, too--the whole picture in gentle motion, and the
bugles and drums of the Royal Irish Artillery filling the air with
inspiring music.

All the neighbours were there--merry little Dr. Toole in his grandest
wig and gold-headed cane, with three dogs at his heels,--he seldom
appeared without this sort of train--sometimes three--sometimes
five--sometimes as many as seven--and his hearty voice was heard bawling
at them by name, as he sauntered through the town of a morning, and
theirs occasionally in short screeches, responsive to the touch of his
cane. Now it was, 'Fairy, you savage, let that pig alone!' a yell and a
scuffle--'Juno, drop it, you slut'--or 'CÃ¦sar, you blackguard, where are
you going?'

'Look at Sturk there, with his lordship,' said Toole, to the fair
Magnolia, with a wink and a nod, and a sneering grin. 'Good natured dog
that--ha! ha! You'll find he'll oust Nutter at last, and get the agency;
that's what he's driving at--always undermining somebody.' Doctor Sturk
and Lord Castlemallard were talking apart on the high ground, and the
artillery surgeon was pointing with his cane at distant objects. 'I'll
lay you fifty he's picking holes in Nutter's management this moment.'

I'm afraid there was some truth in the theory, and Toole--though he did
not remember to mention it--had an instinctive notion that Sturk had an
eye upon the civil practice of the neighbourhood, and was meditating a
retirement from the army, and a serious invasion of his domain.

Sturk and Toole, behind backs, did not spare one another. Toole called
Sturk a 'horse doctor,' and 'the smuggler'--in reference to some affair
about French brandy, never made quite clear to me, but in which, I
believe, Sturk was really not to blame; and Sturk called him 'that
drunken little apothecary'--for Toole had a boy who compounded, under
the rose, his draughts, pills, and powders in the back parlour--and
sometimes, 'that smutty little ballad singer,' or 'that whiskeyfied
dog-fancier, Toole.' There was no actual quarrel, however; they met
freely--told one another the news--their mutual disagreeabilities were
administered guardedly--and, on the whole, they hated one another in a
neighbourly way.

Fat, short, radiant, General Chattesworth--in full, artillery
uniform--was there, smiling, and making little speeches to the ladies,
and bowing stiffly from his hips upward--his great cue playing all the
time up and down his back, and sometimes so near the ground when he
stood erect and threw back his head, that Toole, seeing Juno eyeing the
appendage rather viciously, thought it prudent to cut her speculations
short with a smart kick.

His sister Rebecca--tall, erect, with grand lace, in a splendid stiff
brocade, and with a fine fan--was certainly five-and-fifty, but still
wonderfully fresh, and sometimes had quite a pretty little pink
colour--perfectly genuine--in her cheeks; command sat in her eye and
energy on her lip--but though it was imperious and restless, there was
something provokingly likeable and even pleasant in her face. Her niece,
Gertrude, the general's daughter, was also tall, graceful--and, I am
told, perfectly handsome.

'Be the powers, she's mighty handsome!' observed 'Lieutenant Fireworker'
O'Flaherty, who, being a little stupid, did not remember that such a
remark was not likely to pleasure the charming Magnolia Macnamara, to
whom he had transferred the adoration of a passionate, but somewhat
battered heart.

'They must not see with my eyes that think so,' said Mag, with a
disdainful toss of her head.

'They say she's not twenty, but I'll wager a pipe of claret she's
something to the back of it,' said O'Flaherty, mending his hand.

'Why, bless your innocence, she'll never see five-and-twenty, and a bit
to spare,' sneered Miss Mag, who might more truly have told that tale of
herself. 'Who's that pretty young man my Lord Castlemallard is
introducing to her and old Chattesworth?' The commendation was a shot at
poor O'Flaherty.

'Hey--so, my Lord knows him!' says Toole, very much interested. 'Why
that's Mr. Mervyn, that's stopping at the Phoenix. A. Mervyn,--I saw
it on his dressing case. See how she smiles.'

'Ay, she simpers like a firmity kettle,' said scornful Miss Mag.

'They're very grand to-day, the Chattesworths, with them two livery
footmen behind them,' threw in O'Flaherty, accommodating his remarks to
the spirit of his lady-love.

'That young buck's a man of consequence,' Toole rattled on; 'Miss does
not smile on everybody.'

'Ay, she looks as if butter would not melt in her mouth, but I warrant
cheese won't choke her,' Magnolia laughed out with angry eyes.

Magnolia's fat and highly painted parent--poor bragging, good-natured,
cunning, foolish Mrs. Macnamara, the widow--joined, with a venemous
wheeze in the laugh.

Those who suppose that all this rancour was produced by mere feminine
emulations and jealousy do these ladies of the ancient sept Macnamara
foul wrong. Mrs. Mack, on the contrary, had a fat and genial soul of her
own, and Magnolia was by no means a particularly ungenerous rival in the
lists of love. But Aunt Rebecca was hoitytoity upon the Macnamaras, whom
she would never consent to more than half-know, seeing them with
difficulty, often failing to see them altogether--though Magnolia's
stature and activity did not always render that easy. To-day, for
instance, when the firing was brisk, and some of the ladies uttered
pretty little timid squalls, Miss Magnolia not only stood fire like
brick, but with her own fair hands cracked off a firelock, and was more
complimented and applauded than all the marksmen beside, although she
shot most dangerously wide, and was much nearer hitting old Arthur Slowe
than that respectable gentleman, who waved his hat and smirked
gallantly, was at all aware. Aunt Rebecca, notwithstanding all this, and
although she looked straight at her from a distance of only ten steps,
yet she could not see that large and highly-coloured heroine; and
Magnolia was so incensed at her serene impertinence that when Gertrude
afterwards smiled and courtesied twice, she only held her head the
higher and flung a flashing defiance from her fine eyes right at that
unoffending virgin.

Everybody knew that Miss Rebecca Chattesworth ruled supreme at Belmont.
With a docile old general and a niece so young, she had less resistance
to encounter than, perhaps, her ardent soul would have relished.
Fortunately for the general it was only now and then that Aunt Becky
took a whim to command the Royal Irish Artillery. She had other hobbies
just as odd, though not quite so scandalous. It had struck her active
mind that such of the ancient women of Chapelizod as were destitute of
letters--mendicants and the like--should learn to read. Twice a week her
'old women's school,' under that energetic lady's presidency, brought
together its muster-roll of rheumatism, paralysis, dim eyes, bothered
ears, and invincible stupidity. Over the fire-place in large black
letters, was the legend, 'BETTER LATE THAN NEVER!' and out came the
horn-books and spectacles, and to it they went with their A-B ab, etc.,
and plenty of wheezing and coughing. Aunt Becky kept good fires, and
served out a mess of bread and broth, along with some pungent ethics, to
each of her hopeful old girls. In winter she further encouraged them
with a flannel petticoat apiece, and there was besides a monthly dole.
So that although after a year there was, perhaps, on the whole, no
progress in learning, the affair wore a tolerably encouraging aspect;
for the academy had increased in numbers, and two old fellows, liking
the notion of the broth and the 6d. a month--one a barber, Will Potts,
ruined by a shake in his right hand, the other a drunken pensioner, Phil
Doolan, with a wooden leg--petitioned to be enrolled, and were,
accordingly, admitted. Then Aunt Becky visited the gaols, and had a
knack of picking up the worst characters there, and had generally two or
three discharged felons on her hands. Some people said she was a bit of
a Voltarian, but unjustly; for though she now and then came out with a
bouncing social paradox, she was a good bitter Church-woman. So she was
liberal and troublesome--off-handed and dictatorial--not without good
nature, but administering her benevolences somewhat tyrannically, and,
for the most part, doing more or less of positive mischief in the
process.

And now the general ('old Chattesworth,' as the scornful Magnolia
called him) drew near, with his benevolent smirk, and his stiff bows,
and all his good-natured formalities--for the general had no notion of
ignoring his good friend and officer, Major O'Neill, or his sister or
niece--and so he made up to Mrs. Macnamara, who arrested a narrative in
which she was demonstrating to O'Flaherty the general's lineal descent
from old Chattesworth--an army tailor in Queen Anne's time--and his
cousinship to a live butter dealer in Cork--and spicing her little
history with not a very nice epigram on his uncle, 'the counsellor,' by
Dr. Swift, which she delivered with a vicious chuckle in the
'Fireworker's' ear, who also laughed, though he did not quite see the
joke, and said, 'Oh-ho-ho, murdher!'

The good Mrs. Mack received the general haughtily and slightly, and Miss
Magnolia with a short courtesy and a little toss of her head, and up
went her fan, and she giggled something in Toole's ear, who grinned, and
glanced uneasily out of the corner of his shrewd little eye at the
unsuspicious general and on to Aunt Rebecca; for it was very important
to Dr. Toole to stand well at Belmont. So, seeing that Miss Mag was
disposed to be vicious, and not caring to be compromised by her tricks,
he whistled and bawled to his dogs, and with a jolly smirk and flourish
of his cocked-hat, off he went to seek other adventures.

Thus, was there feud and malice between two houses, and Aunt Rebecca's
wrong-headed freak of cutting the Macnamaras (for it was not 'snobbery,'
and she would talk for hours on band-days publicly and familiarly with
scrubby little Mrs. Toole), involved her innocent relations in scorn and
ill-will; for this sort of offence, like Chinese treason, is not visited
on the arch offender only, but according to a scale of consanguinity,
upon his kith and kin. The criminal is minced--his sons lashed--his
nephews reduced to cutlets--his cousins to joints--and so on--none of
the family quite escapes; and seeing the bitter reprisals provoked by
this kind of uncharity, fiercer and more enduring by much than any
begotten of more tangible wrongs, Christian people who pray, 'lead us
not into temptation,' and repeat 'blessed are the peace-makers,' will,
on the whole, do wisely to forbear practising it.

As handsome, slender Captain Devereux, with his dark face, and great,
strange, earnest eyes, and that look of intelligence so racy and
peculiar, that gave him a sort of enigmatical interest, stepped into the
fair-green, the dark blue glance of poor Nan Glynn, of Palmerstown, from
under her red Sunday riding-hood, followed the tall, dashing, graceful
apparition with a stolen glance of wild loyalty and admiration. Poor
Nan! with thy fun and thy rascalities, thy strong affections and thy
fatal gift of beauty, where does thy head rest now?

Handsome Captain Devereux!--Gipsy Devereux, as they called him for his
clear dark complexion--was talking a few minutes later to Lilias
Walsingham. Oh, pretty Lilias--oh, true lady--I never saw the pleasant
crayon sketch that my mother used to speak of, but the tradition of
thee has come to me--so bright and tender, with its rose and violet
tints, and merry, melancholy dimples, that I see thee now, as then, with
the dew of thy youth still on thee, and sigh as I look, as if on a lost,
early love of mine.

'I'm out of conceit with myself,' he said; 'I'm so idle and useless; I
wish that were all--I wish myself better, but I'm such a weak coxcomb--a
father-confessor might keep me nearer to my duty--some one to scold and
exhort me. Perhaps if some charitable lady would take me in hand,
something might be made of me still.'

There was a vein of seriousness in this reverie which amused the young
lady; for she had never heard anything worse of him--very young ladies
seldom do hear the worst--than that he had played once or twice rather
high.

'Shall I ask Gertrude Chattesworth to speak to her Aunt Rebecca?' said
Lilias slyly. 'Suppose you attend her school in Martin's Row, with
"better late than never" over her chimneypiece: there are two pupils of
your own sex, you know, and you might sit on the bench with poor Potts
and good old Doolan.'

'Thank you. Miss Lilias,' he answered, with a bow and a little laugh, as
it seemed just the least bit in the world piqued; 'I know she would do
it zealously; but neither so well nor so wisely as others might; I wish
I dare ask you to lecture me.'

'I!' said that young lady. 'Oh, yes, I forgot,' she went on merrily,'
five years ago, when I was a little girl, you once called me Dr.
Walsingham's curate, I was so grave--do you remember?'

She did not know how much obliged Devereux was to her for remembering
that poor little joke, and how much the handsome lieutenant would have
given, at that instant, to kiss the hand of the grave little girl of
five years ago.

'I was a more impudent fellow then,' he said, 'than I am now; won't you
forget my old impertinences, and allow me to make atonement, and be
your--your very humble servant now?'

She laughed. 'Not my servant--but you know I can't help you being my
parishioner.'

'And as such surely I may plead an humble right to your counsels and
reproof. Yes, you shall lecture me--I'll bear it from none but you,
and the more you do it, the happier, at least, you make me,' he said.

'Alas, if my censure is pleasant to you, 'tis a certain sign it can do
you no good.'

'It shall do me good, and be it never so bitter and so true, it will
be pleasant to me too,' he answered, with an honest and very peculiar
light in his dark, strange eyes; and after a little pause, 'I'll tell
you why, just because I had rather you remembered my faults, than that
you did not remember me at all.'

'But, 'tis not my business to make people angry.'

'More likely you should make me sad, or perhaps happy, that is to say,
better. I think you'd like to see your parish improve.'

'So I would--but by means of my example, not my preaching. No; I leave
that to wiser heads--to the rector, for instance'--and she drew closer
to the dear old man, with a quick fond glance of such proud affection,
for she thought the sun never shone upon his like, as made Devereux sigh
a little unconscious sigh. The old man did not hear her--he was too
absorbed in his talk--he only felt the pressure of his darling's little
hand, and returned it, after his wont, with a gentle squeeze of his
cassocked arm, while he continued the learned essay he was addressing to
young, queer, erudite, simple Dan Loftus, on the descent of the Decie
branch of the Desmonds. There was, by-the-bye, a rumour--I know not how
true--that these two sages were concocting between them, beside their
folios on the Castle of Chapelizod, an interminable history of Ireland.

Devereux was secretly chafed at the sort of invisible, but insuperable
resistance which pretty Lilias Walsingham, as it seemed, unconsciously
opposed to his approaches to a nearer and tenderer sort of trifling.
'The little Siren! there are air-drawn circles round her which I cannot
pass--and why should I? How is it that she interests me, and yet repels
me so easily? And--and when I came here first,' he continued aloud, 'you
were, oh dear! how mere a child, hardly eleven years old. How long I've
known you, Miss Lilias, and yet how formal you are with me.' There was
reproach almost fierce in his eye, though his tones were low and gentle.
'Well!' he said, with an odd changed little laugh, 'you did commit
yourself at first--you spoke against card-playing, and I tell you
frankly I mean to play a great deal more, and a great deal higher than
I've ever done before, and so adieu.'

He did not choose to see the little motion which indicated that she was
going to shake hands with him, and only bowed the lower, and answered
her grave smile, which seemed to say, 'Now, you are vexed,' with another
little laugh, and turned gaily away, and so was gone.

'She thinks she has wounded me, and she thinks, I suppose, that I can't
be happy away from her. I'll let her see I can; I shan't speak to her,
no, nor look at her, for a month!'

The Chattesworths by this time, as well as others, were moving away--and
that young Mr. Mervyn, more remarked upon than he suspected, walked with
them to the gate of the fair-green. As he passed he bowed low to good
Parson Walsingham, who returned his salute, not unkindly--that never
was--but very gravely, and with his gentle and thoughtful blue eyes
followed the party sadly on their way.

'Ay--there he goes--Mervyn! Well!--so--so--pray Heaven, sorrow and a
blight follow him not into this place.' The rector murmured to himself,
and sighed, still following him with his glance.

Little Lilias, with her hand within his arm, wondered, as she glanced
upward into that beloved face, what could have darkened it with a look
so sad and anxious; and then her eyes also followed the retreating
figure of that pale young man, with a sort of interest not quite unmixed
with uneasiness.






If I stuck at a fib as little as some historians, I might easily tell
you who won the prizes at this shooting on Palmerstown Green. But the
truth is, I don't know; my granduncle could have told me, for he had a
marvellous memory, but he died, a pleasant old gentleman of four-score
and upwards, when I was a small urchin. I remember his lively old face,
his powdered bald head and pigtail, his slight erect figure, and how
merrily he used to play the fiddle for his juvenile posterity to dance
to. But I was not of an age to comprehend the value of this thin, living
volume of old lore, or to question the oracle. Well, it can't be helped
now, and the papers I've got are silent upon the point. But there were
jollifications to no end both in Palmerstown and Chapelizod that night,
and declamatory conversations rising up in the street at very late
hours, and singing, and 'hurooing' along the moonlit roads.

There was a large and pleasant dinner-party, too, in the mess-room of
the Royal Irish Artillery. Lord Castlemallard was there in the place of
honour, next to jolly old General Chattesworth, and the worthy rector,
Doctor Walsingham, and Father Roach, the dapper, florid little priest of
the parish, with his silk waistcoat and well-placed paunch, and his keen
relish for funny stories, side-dishes, and convivial glass; and Dan
Loftus, that simple, meek, semi-barbarous young scholar, his head in a
state of chronic dishevelment, his harmless little round light-blue
eyes, pinkish from late night reading, generally betraying the absence
of his vagrant thoughts, and I know not what of goodness, as well as
queerness, in his homely features.

Good Dr. Walsingham, indeed, in his simple benevolence, had helped the
strange, kindly creature through college, and had a high opinion of him,
and a great delight in his company. They were both much given to books,
and according to their lights zealous archÃ¦ologists. They had got hold
of Chapelizod Castle, a good tough enigma. It was a theme they never
tired of. Loftus had already two folios of extracts copied from all the
records to which Dr. Walsingham could procure him access. They could not
have worked harder, indeed, if they were getting up evidence to prove
their joint title to Lord Castlemallard's estates. This pursuit was a
bond of close sympathy between the rector and the student, and they
spent more time than appeared to his parishioners quite consistent with
sanity in the paddock by the river, pacing up and down, and across,
poking sticks into the earth and grubbing for old walls underground.

Loftus, moreover, was a good Irish scholar, and from Celtic MSS. had
elicited some cross-lights upon his subject--not very bright or steady,
I allow--but enough to delight the rector, and inspire him with a tender
reverence for the indefatigable and versatile youth, who was devoting to
the successful equitation of their hobby so many of his hours, and so
much of his languages, labour, and brains.

Lord Castlemallard was accustomed to be listened to, and was not aware
how confoundedly dull his talk sometimes was. It was measured, and
dreamy, and every way slow. He was entertaining the courteous old
general at the head of the table, with an oration in praise of Paul
Dangerfield--a wonderful man--immensely wealthy--the cleverest man of
his age--he might have been anything he pleased. His lordship really
believed his English property would drop to pieces if Dangerfield
retired from its management, and he was vastly obliged to him inwardly,
for retaining the agency even for a little time longer. He was coming
over to visit the Irish estates--perhaps to give Nutter a wrinkle or
two. He was a bachelor, and his lordship averred would be a prodigious
great match for some of our Irish ladies. Chapelizod would be his
headquarters while in Ireland. No, he was not sure--he rather thought he
was not of the Thorley family; and so on for a mighty long time. But
though he tired them prodigiously, he contrived to evoke before their
minds' eyes a very gigantic, though somewhat hazy figure, and a good
deal stimulated the interest with which a new arrival was commonly
looked for in that pleasant suburban village. There is no knowing how
long Lord Castlemallard might have prosed upon this theme, had he not
been accidentally cut short, and himself laid fast asleep in his chair,
without his or anybody else's intending it. For overhearing, during a
short pause, in which he sipped some claret, Surgeon Sturk applying some
very strong, and indeed, frightful language to a little pamphlet upon
magnetism, a subject then making a stir--as from a much earlier date it
has periodically done down to the present day--he languidly asked Dr.
Walsingham his opinion upon the subject.

Now, Dr. Walsingham was a great reader of out-of-the-way lore, and
retained it with a sometimes painful accuracy; and he forthwith began--

'There is, my Lord Castlemallard, a curious old tract of the learned Van
Helmont, in which he says, as near as I can remember his words, that
magnetism is a magical faculty, which lieth dormant in us by the opiate
of primitive sin, and, therefore, stands in need of an excitator, which
excitator may be either good or evil; but is more frequently Satan
himself, by reason of some previous oppignoration or compact with
witches. The power, indeed, is in the witch, and not conferred by him;
but this versipellous or Protean impostor--these are his words--will not
suffer her to know that it is of her own natural endowment, though for
the present charmed into somnolent inactivity by the narcotic of
primitive sin.'

I verily believe that a fair description--none of your poetical
balderdash, but an honest plodding description of a perfectly
comfortable bed, and of the process of going to sleep, would,
judiciously administered soon after dinner, overpower the vivacity of
any tranquil gentleman who loves a nap after that meal--gently draw the
curtains of his senses, and extinguish the bed-room candle of his
consciousness. In the doctor's address and quotation there was so much
about somnolency and narcotics, and lying dormant, and opiates, that my
Lord Castlemallard's senses forsook him, and he lost, as you, my kind
reader, must, all the latter portion of the doctor's lullaby.

'I'd give half I'm pothethed of, Thir, and all my prothpecth in life,'
lisped vehemently plump little Lieutenant Puddock, in one of those stage
frenzies to which he was prone, 'to be the firtht Alecthander on the
boardth.'

Between ourselves, Puddock was short and fat, very sentimental, and a
little bit of a gourmet; his desk stuffed with amorous sonnets and
receipts for side-dishes; he, always in love, and often in the kitchen,
where, under the rose, he loved to direct the cooking of critical little
plats, very good-natured, rather literal, very courteous, a
chevallier, indeed, sans reproche. He had a profound faith in his
genius for tragedy, but those who liked him best could not help thinking
that his plump cheeks, round, little light eyes, his lisp, and a certain
lack-a-daisical, though solemn expression of surprise, which Nature, in
one of her jocular moods, seemed to have fixed upon his countenance,
were against his shining in that walk of the drama. He was blessed, too,
with a pleasant belief in his acceptance with the fair sex, but had a
real one with his comrades, who knew his absurdities and his virtues,
and laughed at and loved him.

'But hang it, there 'th no uthe in doing things by halves. Melpomene's
the most jealous of the Muses. I tell you if you stand well in her
gratheth, by Jove, Thir, you mutht give yourthelf up to her body and
thoul. How the deuthe can a fellow that's out at drill at hicth in the
morning, and all day with his head filled with tacticth and gunnery,
and--and--'

'And 'farced pigeons' and lovely women,' said Devereux.

'And such dry professional matterth,' continued he, without noticing,
perhaps hearing the interpolation, 'How can he pothibly have a chance
againth geniuses, no doubt--vathly thuperior by nature'--(Puddock, the
rogue, believed no such thing)--'but who devote themthelveth to the
thtudy of the art incethantly, exclusively, and--and----'

'Impossible,' said O'Flaherty. 'There now, was Tommy Shycock, of
Ballybaisly, that larned himself to balance a fiddle-stick on his chin;
and the young leedies, and especially Miss Kitty Mahony, used to be all
around him in the ball-room at Thralee, lookin', wondhrin', and
laughin'; and I that had twiste his brains, could not come round it,
though I got up every morning for a month at four o'clock, and was
obleeged to give over be rason of a soart iv a squint I was gettin' be
looking continually at the fiddle-stick. I began with a double bass, the
way he did--it's it that was the powerful fateaguin' exercise, I can
tell you. Two blessed hours a-day, regular practice, besides an odd
half-hour, now and agin, for three mortial years, it took him to larn
it, and dhrilled a dimple in his chin you could put a marrow-fat pay
in.'

'Practice,' resumed Puddock, I need not spell his lisp, 'study--time to
devote--industry in great things as in small--there's the secret.
Nature, to be sure--'

'Ay, Nature, to be sure--we must sustain Nature, dear Puddock, so pass
the bottle,' said Devereux, who liked his glass.

'Be the powers, Mr. Puddock, if I had half your janius for play-acting,'
persisted O'Flaherty, 'nothing i'd keep me from the boards iv
Smock-alley play-house--incog., I mean, of course. There's that
wonderful little Mr. Garrick--why he's the talk of the three kingdoms as
long as I can remember--an' making his thousand pounds a week--coining,
be gannies--an' he can't be much taller than you, for he's contimptably
small.'

'I'm the taller man of the two,' said little Puddock, haughtily, who had
made enquiries, and claimed half an inch over Rocius, honestly, let us
hope. 'But this is building castles in the air; joking apart, however, I
do confess I should dearly love--just for a maggot--to play two
parts--Richard the Third and Tamerlane.'

'Was not that the part you spoke that sympathetic speech out of for me
before dinner?'

'No, that was Justice Greedy,' said Devereux.

'Ay, so it was--was it?--that smothered his wife.'

'With a pudding clout,' persisted Devereux.

'No. With a--pooh!--a--you know--and stabbed himself,' continued
O'Flaherty.

'With a larding-pin--'tis written in good Italian.'

'Augh, not at all--it isn't Italian, but English, I'm thinking of--a
pilla, Puddock, you know--the black rascal.'

'Well, English or Italian--tragedy or comedy,' said Devereux, who liked
Puddock, and would not annoy him, and saw he was hurt by Othello's
borrowing his properties from the kitchen; 'I venture to say you were
well entertained: and for my part, Sir, there are some characters'--(in
farce Puddock was really highly diverting)--'in which I prefer Puddock
to any player I every saw.'

'Oh--ho--ho!' laughed poor little Puddock, with a most gratified
derisiveness, for he cherished in secret a great admiration for
Devereux.

And so they talked stage-talk. Puddock lithping away, grand and
garrulous; O'Flaherty, the illiterate, blundering in with sincere
applause; and Devereux sipping his claret and dropping a quiet saucy
word now and again.

'I shall never forget Mrs. Cibber's countenance in that last scene--you
know--in the "Orphan"--Monimia you know, Devereux.' And the table
being by this time in high chat, and the chairs a little irregular,
Puddock slipped off his, and addressing himself to Devereux and
O'Flaherty--just to give them a notion of Mrs. Cibber--began, with a
countenance the most wobegone, and in a piping falsetto--

     'When I am laid low, i' the grave, and quite forgotten.'

Monimia dies at the end of the speech--as the reader may not be aware;
but when Puddock came to the line--

     'When I am dead, as presently I shall be,'

all Mrs. Cibber's best points being still to come, the little
lieutenant's heel caught in the edge of the carpet, as he sailed with an
imaginary hoop on grandly backward, and in spite of a surprising
flick-flack cut in the attempt to recover his equipoise, down came the
'orphan,' together with a table-load of spoons and plates, with a crash
that stopt all conversation.

Lord Castlemallard waked up, with a snort and a 'hollo, gentlemen!'

'It's only poor dear Monimia, general,' said Devereux with a melancholy
bow, in reply to a fiery and startled stare darted to the point by that
gallant officer.

'Hey--eh?' said his lordship, brightening up, and gazing glassily round
with a wan smile; and I fancy he thought a lady had somehow introduced
herself during his nap, and was pleased, for he admired the sex.

'If there's any recitation going on, I think it had better be for the
benefit of the company,' said the general, a little surly, and looking
full upon the plump Monimia, who was arranging his frill and hair, and
getting a little awkwardly into his place.

'And I think 'twould be no harm, Lieutenant Puddock, my dear,' says
Father Roach, testily, for he had been himself frightened by the crash,
'if you'd die a little aisier the next time.'

Puddock began to apologise.

'Never mind,' said the general, recovering, 'let's fill our glasses--my
Lord Castlemallard, they tell me this claret is a pretty wine.'

'A very pretty wine,' said my lord.

'And suppose, my lord, we ask these gentlemen to give us a song? I say,
gentlemen, there are fine voices among you. Will some gentleman oblige
the company with a song?'

'Mr. Loftus sings a very fine song, I'm told,' said Captain Cluffe, with
a wink at Father Roach.

'Ay,' cried Roach, backing up the joke (a good old one, and not yet
quite off the hooks), 'Mr. Loftus sings, I'll take my davy--I've heard
him!'

Loftus was shy, simple, and grotesque, and looked like a man who could
not sing a note. So when he opened his eyes, looked round, and blushed,
there was a general knocking of glasses, and a very flattering clamour
for Mr. Loftus's song.

But when silence came, to the surprise of the company he submitted,
though with manifest trepidation, and told them that he would sing as
the company desired. It was a song from a good old writer upon fasting
in Lent, and was, in fact, a reproof to all hypocrisy. Hereupon there
was a great ringing of glasses and a jolly round of laughter rose up in
the cheer that welcomed the announcement. Father Roach looked queer and
disconcerted, and shot a look of suspicion at Devereux, for poor Dan
Loftus had, in truth, hit that divine strait in a very tender spot.

The fact is, Father Roach was, as Irish priests were sometimes then, a
bit of a sportsman. He and Toole used occasionally to make mysterious
excursions to the Dublin mountains. He had a couple of mighty good dogs,
which he lent freely, being a good-natured fellow. He liked good living
and jolly young fellows, and was popular among the officers, who used to
pop in freely enough at his reverence's green hall-door whenever they
wanted a loan of his dogs, or to take counsel of the ghostly father
(whose opinion was valued more highly even than Toole's) upon the case
of a sick dog or a lame nag.

Well, one morning--only a few weeks before--Devereux and Toole together
had looked in on some such business upon his reverence--a little
suddenly--and found him eating a hare!--by all the gods, it
was--hare-pie in the middle of Lent!

It was at breakfast. His dinner was the meal of an anchorite, and who
would have guessed that these confounded sparks would have bounced into
his little refectory at that hour of the morning? There was no room for
equivocation; he had been caught in the very act of criminal
conversation with the hare-pie. He rose with a spring, like a
Jack-in-a-box, as they entered, and knife and fork in hand, and with
shining chops, stared at them with an angry, bothered, and alarmed
countenance, which increased their laughter. It was a good while before
he obtained a hearing, such was the hilarity, so sustained the fire of
ironical compliments, enquiries, and pleasantries, and the general
uproar.

When he did, with hand uplifted, after the manner of a prisoner
arraigned for murder, he pleaded 'a dispensation.' I suppose it was
true, for he backed the allegation with several most religious oaths and
imprecations, and explained how men were not always quite so strong as
they looked; that he might, if he liked it, by permission of his bishop,
eat meat at every meal in the day, and every day in the week; that his
not doing so was a voluntary abstinence--not conscientious, only
expedient--to prevent the 'unreasonable remarks' of his parishioners (a
roar of laughter); that he was, perhaps, rightly served for not having
publicly availed himself of his bishop's dispensation (renewed peals of
merriment). By this foolish delicacy (more of that detestable
horse-laughter), he had got himself into a false position; and so on,
till the ad misericordiam peroration addressed to 'Captain Devereux,
dear,' and 'Toole, my honey.' Well, they quizzed him unmercifully; they
sat down and eat all that was left of the hare-pie, under his wistful
ogle. They made him narrate minutely every circumstance connected with
the smuggling of the game, and the illicit distillation for the mess.
They never passed so pleasant a morning. Of course he bound them over to
eternal secrecy, and of course, as in all similar cases, the vow was
religiously observed; nothing was ever heard of it at mess--oh, no--and
Toole never gave a dramatic representation of the occurrence, heightened
and embellished with all the little doctor's genius for farce.

There certainly was a monologue to which he frequently afterwards
treated the Aldermen of Skinner's Alley, and other convivial bodies, at
supper, the doctor's gestures were made with knife and fork in hand, and
it was spoken in a rich brogue and tones sometimes of thrilling pathos,
anon of sharp and vehement indignation, and again of childlike
endearment, amidst pounding and jingling of glasses, and screams of
laughter from the company. Indeed the lord mayor, a fat slob of a
fellow, though not much given to undue merriment, laughed his ribs into
such a state of breathless torture, that he implored of Toole, with a
wave of his hand--he could not speak--to give him breathing time, which
that voluble performer disregarding, his lordship had to rise twice, and
get to the window, or, as he afterwards said, he should have lost his
life; and when the performance was ended, his fat cheeks were covered
with tears, his mouth hung down, his head wagged slowly from side to
side, and with short gasping 'oohs,' and 'oohs,' his hands pressed to
his pudgy ribs, he looked so pale and breathless, that although they
said nothing, several of his comrades stared hard at him, and thought
him in rather a queer state.

Shortly after this little surprise, I suppose by way of ratifying the
secret treaty of silence, Father Roach gave the officers and Toole a
grand Lent dinner of fish, with no less than nineteen different plats,
baked, boiled, stewed, in fact, a very splendid feast; and Puddock
talked of some of those dishes more than twenty years afterwards.






No wonder, then, if Father Roach, when Loftus, in the innocence of his
heart, announced his song and its theme, was thoroughly uneasy, and
would have given a good deal that he had not helped that simple youth
into his difficulty. But things must now take their course. So amid a
decorous silence, Dan Loftus lifted up his voice, and sang. That voice
was a high small pipe, with a very nervous quaver in it. He leaned back
in his chair, and little more than the whites of his upturned eyes were
visible; and beating time upon the table with one hand, claw-wise, and
with two or three queer, little thrills and roulades, which re-appeared
with great precision in each verse, he delivered himself thus, in what I
suspect was an old psalm tune:--

  'Now Lent is come, let us refrain
  From carnal creatures, quick or slain;
  Let's fast and macerate the flesh,
  Impound and keep it in distress.'

Here there came a wonderful, unspellable choking sound, partly through
the mouth, partly through the nose, from several of the officers; and
old General Chattesworth, who was frowning hard upon his dessert-plate,
cried, 'Order, gentlemen,' in a stern, but very tremulous undertone.
Lord Castlemallard, leaning upon his elbow, was staring with a grave and
dreamy curiosity at the songster, and neither he nor his lordship heard
the interruption, and on went the pleasant ditty; and as the musician
regularly repeated the last two lines like a clerk in a piece of
psalmody, the young wags, to save themselves from bursting outright,
joined in the chorus, while verse after verse waxed more uproarious and
hilarious, and gave a singular relief to Loftus's thin, high, quavering
solo:--

  (Loftus, solo.)

  'But to forbear from flesh, fowl, fish,
  And eat potatoes in a dish,
  Done o'er with amber, or a mess
  Of ringos in a Spanish dress

  (Chorus of Officers.)

  'Done o'er with amber, or a mess
  Of ringos in a Spanish dress.'

''Tis a good song,' murmured Doctor Walsingham in Lord Castlemallard's
ear--'I know the verses well--the ingenious and pious Howel penned them
in the reign of King James the First.'

'Ha! thank you, Sir,' said his lordship.

  (Loftus, solo.)

  'Or to refrain from all high dishes,
  But feed our thoughts with wanton wishes,
  Making the soul, like a light wench,
  Wear patches of concupiscence.

  (Chorus of Officers.)

  'Making the soul, like a light wench,
  Wear patches of concupiscence

  (Loftus, solo.)

  'This is not to keep Lent aright,
  But play the juggling hypocrite;
  For we must starve the inward man,
  And feed the outward too on bran.

  (Chorus of Officers.)

  'For we must starve the inward man,
  And feed the outward too on bran.'

I believe no song was ever received with heartier bursts of laughter and
applause. Puddock indeed was grave, being a good deal interested in the
dishes sung by the poet. So, for the sake of its moral point, was Dr.
Walsingham, who, with brows gathered together judicially, kept time with
head and hand, murmuring 'true, true--good, Sir, good,' from time to
time, as the sentiment liked him.

But honest Father Roach was confoundedly put out by the performance. He
sat with his blue double chin buried in his breast, his mouth pursed up
tightly, a red scowl all over his face, his quick, little, angry,
suspicious eyes peeping cornerwise, now this way, now that, not knowing
how to take what seemed to him like a deliberate conspiracy to roast him
for the entertainment of the company, who followed the concluding verse
with a universal roaring chorus, which went off into a storm of
laughter, in which Father Roach made an absurd attempt to join. But it
was only a gunpowder glare, swallowed in an instant in darkness, and
down came the black portcullis of his scowl with a chop, while clearing
his voice, and directing his red face and vicious little eyes straight
on simple Dan Loftus he said, rising very erect and square from an
unusually ceremonious bow--

'I don't know, Mr. Loftus, exactly what you mean by a "ring-goat in a
Spanish dress"' (the priest had just smuggled over a wonderful bit of
ecclesiastical toggery from Salamanca): 'and--a--person wearing patches,
you said of--of--patches of concupiscence, I think.' (Father Roach's
housekeeper unfortunately wore patches, though, it is right to add, she
was altogether virtuous, and by no means young); 'but I'm bound to
suppose, by the amusement our friends seem to derive from it, Sir, that
a ring-goat, whatever it means, is a good joke, as well as a
good-natured one.'

'But, by your leave, Sir,' emphatically interposed Puddock, on whose ear
the ecclesiastic's blunder grated like a discord, 'Mr. Loftus sang
nothing about a goat, though kid is not a bad thing: he said, "ringos,"
meaning, I conclude, eringoeous, a delicious preserve or confection.
Have you never eaten them, either preserved or candied--a--why I--a--I
happen to have a receipt--a--and if you permit me, Sir--a capital
receipt. When I was a boy, I made some once at home, Sir; and, by
Jupiter, my brother, Sam, eat of them till he was quite sick--I
remember, so sick, by Jupiter, my poor mother and old Dorcas had to
sit up all night with him--a--and--I was going to say, if you will allow
me, Sir, I shall be very happy to send the receipt to your housekeeper.'

'You'll not like it, Sir,' said Devereux, mischievously: 'but there
really is a capital one--quite of another kind--a lenten dish--fish, you
know, Puddock--the one you described yesterday; but Mr. Loftus has, I
think, a still better way.'

'Have you, Sir?' asked Puddock, who had a keen appetite for knowledge.

'I don't know, Captain Puddock,' murmured Loftus, bewildered.

'What is it?' remarked his reverence, shortly.

'A roast roach,' answered Puddock, looking quite innocently in that
theologian's fiery face.

'Thank you,' said Father Roach, with an expression of countenance
which polite little Puddock did not in the least understand.

'And how do you roast him--we know Loftus's receipt,' persisted
Devereux, with remarkable cruelty.

'Just like a lump,' said Puddock, briskly.

'And how is that?' enquired Devereux.

'Flay the lump--splat him--divide him,' answered Puddock, with great
volubility; 'and cut each side into two pieces; season with salt,
pepper, and nutmeg, and baste with clarified butter; dish him with
slices of oranges, barberries, grapes, gooseberries, and butter; and you
will find that he eats deliriously either with farced pain or gammon
pain.'

This rhapsody, delivered with the rapidity and emphasis of Puddock's
earnest lisp, was accompanied with very general tokens of merriment from
the company, and the priest, who half suspected him of having invented
it, was on the point of falling foul of him, when Lord Castlemallard
rose to take leave, and the general forthwith vacated the chair, and so
the party broke up, fell into groups, and the greater part sauntered off
to the Phoenix, where, in the club-room, they, with less restraint,
and some new recruits, carried on the pleasures of the evening, which
pleasures, as will sometimes happen, ended in something rather serious.









Nearly a dozen gentlemen broke out at once into voluble speech. Nutter
was in a confounded passion; but being a man of few words, showed his
wrath chiefly in his countenance, and stood with his legs apart and his
arms stuffed straight into his coat pockets, his back to the fire-place,
with his chest thrown daringly out, sniffing the air in a state of high
tension, and as like as a respectable little fellow of five feet six
could be to that giant who smelt the blood of the Irishman, and swore,
with a 'Fee! Faw!! Fum!!!' he'd 'eat him for his supper that night.'

'None of the corps can represent you, Nutter, you know,' said Captain
Cluffe. 'It may go hard enough with Puddock and O'Flaherty, as the
matter stands; but, by Jove! if any of us appear on the other side, the
general would make it a very serious affair, indeed.'

'Toole, can't you?' asked Devereux.

'Out of the question,' answered he, shutting his eyes, with a frown, and
shaking his head. 'There's no man I'd do it sooner for, Nutter knows;
but I can't--I've refused too often; besides, you'll want me
professionally, you know; for Sturk must attend that Royal Hospital
enquiry to-morrow all day--but hang it, where's the difficulty? Isn't
there?--pooh!--why there must be lots of fellows at hand. Just--a--just
think for a minute.'

'I don't care who,' said Nutter, with dry ferocity, 'so he can load a
pistol.'

'Tom Forsythe would have done capitally, if he was at home,' said one.

'But he's not,' remarked Cluffe.

'Well,' said Toole, getting close up to Devereux, in a coaxing
undertone, 'suppose we try Loftus.'

'Dan Loftus!' ejaculated Devereux.

'Dan Loftus,' repeated the little doctor, testily; 'remember, it's just
eleven o'clock. He's no great things, to be sure; but what better can we
get.'

'Allons, donc!' said Devereux, donning his cocked-hat, with a shrug, and
the least little bit of a satirical smile, and out bustled the doctor
beside him.

'Where the deuce did that broganeer, O'Flaherty, come from?' said
Cluffe, confidentially, to old Major O'Neill.

'A Connaughtman,' answered the major, with a grim smile, for he was
himself of that province and was, perhaps, a little bit proud of his
countryman.

'Toole says he's well connected,' pursued Cluffe; 'but, by Jupiter! I
never saw so-mere a Teague; and the most cross-grained devil of a
cat-a-mountain.'

'I could not quite understand why he fastened on Mr. Nutter,' observed
the major, with a mild smile.

'I'll rid the town of him,' rapped out Nutter, with an oath, leering at
his own shoebuckle, and tapping the sole with asperity on the floor.

'If you are thinking of any unpleasant measures, gentlemen, I'd rather,
if you please, know nothing of them,' said the sly, quiet major; 'for
the general, you are aware, has expressed a strong opinion about such
affairs; and as 'tis past my bed-hour, I'll wish you, gentlemen, a
good-night,' and off went the major.

'Upon my life, if this Connaught rapparee is permitted to carry on his
business of indiscriminate cut-throat here, he'll make the service very
pleasant,' resumed Cluffe, who, though a brisk young fellow of
eight-and-forty, had no special fancy for being shot. 'I say the general
ought to take the matter into his own hands.'

'Not till I'm done with it,' growled Nutter.

'And send the young gentleman home to Connaught,' pursued Cluffe.

'I'll send him first to the other place,' said Nutter, in allusion to
the Lord Protector's well-known alternative.

In the open street, under the sly old moon, red little Dr. Toole, in his
great wig, and Gipsy Devereux, in quest of a squire for the good knight
who stood panting for battle in the front parlour of the 'Phoenix,'
saw a red glimmer in Loftus's dormant window.

'He's alive and stirring still,' said Devereux, approaching the hall
door with a military nonchalance.

'Whisht!' said Toole, plucking him back by the sash: 'we must not make a
noise--the house is asleep. I'll manage it--leave it to me.'

And he took up a handful of gravel, but not having got the range, he
shied it all against old Tom Drought's bed-room window.

'Deuce take that old sneak,' whispered Toole vehemently, 'he's always in
the way; the last man in the town I'd have--but no matter:' and up went
a pebble, better directed, for this time it went right through Loftus's
window, and a pleasant little shower of broken glass jingled down into
the street.

'Confound you, Toole,' said Devereux, 'you'll rouse the town.

'Plague take the fellow's glass--it's as thin as paper,' sputtered
Toole.

'Loftus, we want you,' said Toole, in a hard whispered shout, and making
a speaking trumpet of his hands, as the wild head of the student, like
nothing in life but a hen's nest, appeared above.

'Cock-Loftus, come down, d'ye hear?' urged Devereux.

'Dr. Toole and Lieutenant Devereux--I--I--dear me! yes. Gentlemen, your
most obedient,' murmured Loftus vacantly, and knocking his head smartly
on the top of the window frame, in recovering from a little bow. 'I'll
be wi' ye, gentlemen, in a moment.' And the hen's nest vanished.

Toole and Devereux drew back a little into the shadow of the opposite
buildings, for while they were waiting, a dusky apparition, supposed to
be old Drought in his night-shirt, appeared at that gentleman's windows,
saluting the ambassadors with mop and moe, in a very threatening and
energetic way. Just as this demonstration subsided, the hall door opened
wide--and indeed was left so--while our friend Loftus, in a wonderful
tattered old silk coat, that looked quite indescribable by moonlight,
the torn linings hanging down in loops inside the skirts, pale and
discoloured, like the shreds of banners in a cathedral; his shirt loose
at the neck, his breeches unbuttoned at the knees, and a gigantic,
misshapen, and mouldy pair of slippers clinging and clattering about his
feet, came down the steps, his light, round little eyes and queer, quiet
face peering at them into the shade, and a smokified volume of divinity
tucked under his arm, with his finger between the leaves to keep the
place.

When Devereux saw him approaching, the whole thing--mission, service,
man, and all--struck him in so absurd a point of view, that he burst out
into an explosion of laughter, which only grew more vehement and
uproarious the more earnestly and imploringly Toole tried to quiet him,
pointing up with both hands, and all his fingers extended, to the
windows of the sleeping townsfolk, and making horrible grimaces, shrugs,
and ogles. But the young gentleman was not in the habit of denying
himself innocent indulgences, and shaking himself loose of Toole, he
walked down the dark side of the street in peals of laughter, making,
ever and anon, little breathless remarks to himself, which his colleague
could not hear, but which seemed to have the effect of setting him off
again into new hemi-demi-semiquavers and roars of laughter, and left the
doctor to himself, to conduct the negociation with Loftus.

'Well?' said Devereux, by this time recovering breath, as the little
doctor, looking very red and glum, strutted up to him along the shady
pavement.

'Well? well?--oh, ay, very well, to be sure. I'd like to know what
the plague we're to do now,' grumbled Toole.

'Your precious armour-bearer refuses to act then?' asked Devereux.

'To be sure he does. He sees you walking down the street, ready to die
o' laughing--at nothing, by Jove!' swore Toole, in deep disgust;
'and--and--och! hang it! it's all a confounded pack o' nonsense. Sir, if
you could not keep grave for five minutes, you ought not to have come at
all. But what need I care? It's Nutter's affair, not mine.'

'And well for him we failed. Did you ever see such a fish? He'd have
shot himself or Nutter, to a certainty. But there's a chance yet: we
forgot the Nightingale Club; they're still in the Phoenix.'

'Pooh, Sir! they're all tailors and green-grocers,' said Toole, in high
dudgeon.

'There are two or three good names among them, however,' answered
Devereux; and by this time they were on the threshold of the Phoenix.

'Larry,' he cried to the waiter, 'the Nightingale Club is there, is it
not?' glancing at the great back parlour door.

'Be the powers! Captain, you may say that,' said Larry, with a wink, and
a grin of exquisite glee.

'See, Larry,' said Toole, with importance, 'we're a little serious now;
so just say if there's any of the gentlemen there; you--you understand,
now; quite steady? D'ye see me?'

Larry winked--this time a grave wink--looked down at the floor, and up
to the cornice, and--

'Well,' said he, 'to be candid with you, jest at this
minute--half-an-hour ago, you see, it was different--the only gentleman
I'd take on myself to recommend to you as perfectly sober is Mr. Macan,
of Petticoat-lane.'

'Is he in business?' asked Toole.

'Does he keep a shop?' said Devereux.

'A shop! two shops;--a great man in the chandlery line,' responded
Larry.

'H'm! not precisely the thing we want, though,' says Toole.

'There are some of them, surely, that don't keep shops,' said
Devereux, a little impatiently.

'Millions!' said Larry.

'Come, say their names.'

'Only one of them came this evening, Mr. Doolan, of Stonnybatther--he's
a retired merchant.'

'That will do,' said Toole, under his breath, to Devereux. Devereux
nodded.

'Just, I say, tap him on the shoulder, and tell him that Dr. Toole, you
know, of this town, with many compliments and excuses, begs one word
with him,' said the doctor.

'Hoo! Docthur dear, he was the first of them down, and was carried out
to his coach insensible jist when Mr. Crozier of Christ Church began,
"Come Roger and listen;" he's in his bed in Stonnybatther a good hour
and a half ago.'

'A retired merchant,' says Devereux; 'well, Toole, what do you advise
now?'

'By Jove, I think one of us must go into town. 'Twill never do to leave
poor Nutter in the lurch; and between ourselves, that O'Flaherty's a--a
blood-thirsty idiot, by Jove--and ought to be put down.'

'Let's see Nutter--you or I must go--we'll take one of these songster's
"noddies."'

A 'noddy' give me leave to remark, was the one-horse hack vehicle of
Dublin and the country round, which has since given place to the
jaunting car, which is, in its turn, half superseded by the cab.

And Devereux, followed by Toole, entered the front parlour again. But
without their help, the matter was arranging itself, and a second, of
whom they knew nothing, was about to emerge.






When Dr. Toole grumbled at his disappointment, he was not at all aware
how nearly his interview with Loftus had knocked the entire affair on
the head. He had no idea how much that worthy person was horrified by
his proposition; and Toole walked off in a huff, without bidding him
good-night, and making a remark in which the words 'old woman' occurred
pretty audibly. But Loftus remained under the glimpses of the moon in
perturbation and sore perplexity. It was so late he scarcely dared
disturb Dr. Walsingham or General Chattesworth. But there came
the half-stifled cadence of a song--not bacchanalian, but
sentimental--something about Daphne and a swain--struggling through the
window-shutters next the green hall-door close by, and Dan instantly
bethought himself of Father Roach. So knocking stoutly at the window, he
caused the melody to subside and the shutter to open. When the priest,
looking out, saw Dan Loftus in his deshabille, I believe he thought for
a moment it was something from the neighbouring churchyard.

However, his reverence came out and stood on the steps, enveloped in a
hospital aroma of broiled bones, lemons, and alcohol, and shaking his
visitor affectionately by the hand--for he bore no malice, and the
Lenten ditty he quite forgave as being no worse in modern parlance than
an unhappy 'fluke'--was about to pull him into the parlour, where there
was ensconced, he told him, 'a noble friend of his.' This was 'Pat
Mahony, from beyond Killarney, just arrived--a man of parts and
conversation, and a lovely singer.'

But Dan resisted, and told his tale in an earnest whisper in the hall.
The priest made his mouth into a round queer little O, through which he
sucked a long breath, elevating his brows, and rolling his eyes slowly
about.

'A jewel! And Nutter, of all the men on the face of the airth--though I
often heerd he was a fine shot, and a sweet little fencer in his youth,
an' game, too--oh, be the powers! you can see that still--game to the
back-bone--and--whisht a bit now--who's the other?'

'Lieutenant O'Flaherty.'

(A low whistle from his reverence). 'That's a boy that comes from a
fighting county--Galway. I wish you saw them at an election time. Why,
there's no end of divarsion--the divarsion of stopping them, of
course, I mean (observing a sudden alteration in Loftus's countenance).
An' you, av coorse, want to stop it? And so, av coorse, do I, my dear.
Well, then, wait a bit, now--we must have our eyes open. Don't be in a
hurry--let us be harrumless as sarpints, but wise as doves. Now, 'tis
a fine thing, no doubt, to put an end to a jewel by active
intherfarence, though I have known cases, my dear child, where
suppressing a simple jewel has been the cause of half a dozen breaking
out afterwards in the same neighbourhood, and on the very same quarrel,
d'ye mind--though, of coorse, that's no reason here or there, my dear
boy! But take it that a jewel is breaking down and coming to the ground
of itself (here a hugely cunning wink), in an aisy, natural,
accommodating way, the only effect of intherfarence is to bolster it up,
d'ye see, so just considher how things are, my dear. Lave it all to me,
and mind my words, it can't take place without a second. The officers
have refused, so has Toole, you won't undertake it, and it's too late
to go into town. I defy it to come to anything. Jest be said be me, Dan
Loftus, and let sleeping dogs lie. Here I am, an old experienced
observer, that's up to their tricks, with my eye upon them. Go you to
bed--lave them to me--and they're checkmated without so much as seeing
how we bring it to pass.'

Dan hesitated.

'Arrah! go to your bed, Dan Loftus, dear. It's past eleven
o'clock--they're nonplussed already; and lave me--me that understands
it--to manage the rest.'

'Well, Sir, I do confide it altogether to you. I know I might, through
ignorance, do a mischief.'

And so they bid a mutual good-night, and Loftus scaled his garret stair
and snuffed his candle, and plunged again into the business of two
thousand years ago.

'Here's a purty business,' says the priest, extending both his palms,
with a face of warlike importance, and shutting the door behind him
with what he called 'a cow's kick;' 'a jewel, my dear Pat, no less;
bloody work I'm afeared.'

Mr. Mahony, who had lighted a pipe during his entertainer's absence,
withdrew the fragrant tube from his lips, and opened his capacious mouth
with a look of pleasant expectation, for he, like other gentlemen of his
day--and, must we confess, not a few jolly clerics of my creed, as well
as of honest Father Roach's--regarded the ordeal of battle, and all its
belongings, simply as the highest branch of sporting. Not that the
worthy father avowed any such sentiment; on the contrary, his voice and
his eyes, if not his hands, were always raised against the sanguinary
practice; and scarce a duel occurred within a reasonable distance
unattended by his reverence, in the capacity, as he said, of 'an
unauthorised, but airnest, though, he feared, unavailing peacemaker.'
There he used to spout little maxims of reconciliation, and Christian
brotherhood and forbearance; exhorting to forget and forgive; wringing
his hands at each successive discharge; and it must be said, too, in
fairness, playing the part of a good Samaritan towards the wounded, to
whom his green hall-door was ever open, and for whom the oil of his
consolation and the wine of his best bin never refused to flow.

'Pat, my child,' said his reverence, 'that Nutter's a divil of a
fellow--at least he was, by all accounts; he'll be bad enough, I'm
afeared, and hard enough to manage, if everything goes smooth; but if
he's kept waiting there, fuming and boiling over, do ye mind, without a
natural vent for his feelings, or a friend, do ye see, at his side
to--to resthrain him, and bring about, if possible, a friendly mutual
understanding--why, my dear child, he'll get into that state of
exasperation an' violence, he'll have half a dozen jewels on his hands
before morning.'

'Augh! 'tid be a murther to baulk them for want of a friend,' answered
Mr. Mahony, standing up like a warrior, and laying the pipe of peace
upon the chimney. 'Will I go down, Father Denis, and offer my sarvices?'

'With a view to a reconciliation, mind,' said his reverence, raising
his finger, closing his eyes, and shaking his florid face impressively.

'Och, bother! don't I know--of coorse, reconciliation;' and he was
buttoning his garments where, being a little 'in flesh,' as well as
tall, he had loosed them. 'Where are the gentlemen now, and who will I
ask for?'

'I'll show you the light from the steps. Ask for Dr. Toole; and he's
certainly there; and if he's not, for Mr. Nutter; and just say you
came from my house, where you--a--pooh! accidentally heard, through Mr.
Loftus, do ye mind, there was a difficulty in finding a friend
to--a--strive to make up matters between thim.'

By this time they stood upon the door-steps; and Mr. Mahony had clapt on
his hat with a pugnacious cock o' one side; and following, with a
sporting and mischievous leer, the direction of the priest's hand, that
indicated the open door of the Phoenix, through which a hospitable
light was issuing.

'There's where you'll find the gentlemen, in the front parlour,' says
the priest. 'You remember Dr. Toole, and he'll remember you. An'
mind, dear, it's to make it up you're goin'.' Mr. Mahony was already
under weigh, at a brisk stride, and with a keen relish for the business.
'And the blessing of the peacemaker go with you, my child!' added his
reverence, lifting his hands and his eyes towards the heavens, 'An' upon
my fainy!' looking shrewdly at the stars, and talking to himself,
'they'll have a fine morning for the business, if, unfortunately'--and
here he re-ascended his door-steps with a melancholy shrug--'if
unfortunately, Pat Mahony should fail.'

When Mr. Pat Mahony saw occasion for playing the gentleman, he certainly
did come out remarkably strong in the part. It was done in a noble,
florid, glowing style, according to his private ideal of the complete
fine gentleman. Such bows, such pointing of the toes, such graceful
flourishes of the three-cocked hat--such immensely engaging smiles and
wonderful by-play, such an apparition, in short, of perfect
elegance-valour, and courtesy, were never seen before in the front
parlour of the Phoenix.

'Mr. Mahony, by jingo!' ejaculated Toole, in an accent of thankfulness
amounting nearly to rapture. Nutter seemed relieved, too, and advanced
to be presented to the man who, instinct told him, was to be his friend.
Cluffe, a man of fashion of the military school, eyed the elegant
stranger with undisguised disgust and wonder, and Devereux with that
sub-acid smile with which men will sometimes quietly relish absurdity.

Mr. Mahony, 'discoursin' a country neighbour outside the half-way-house
at Muckafubble, or enjoying an easy tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte with Father Roach, was
a very inferior person, indeed, to Patrick Mahony, Esq., the full-blown
diplomatist and pink of gentility astonishing the front parlour of the
Phoenix.

There, Mr. Mahony's periods were fluent and florid, and the words
chosen occasionally rather for their grandeur and melody than for their
exact connexion with the context or bearing upon his meaning. The
consequence was a certain gorgeous haziness and bewilderment, which made
the task of translating his harangues rather troublesome and
conjectural.

Having effected the introduction, and made known the object of his
visit, Nutter and he withdrew to a small chamber behind the bar, where
Nutter, returning some of his bows, and having listened without deriving
any very clear ideas to two consecutive addresses from his companion,
took the matter in hand himself, and said he--

'I beg, Sir, to relieve you at once from the trouble of trying to
arrange this affair amicably. I have been grossly insulted, he's not
going to apologise, and nothing but a meeting will satisfy me. He's a
mere murderer. I have not the faintest notion why he wants to kill me;
but being reduced to this situation, I hold myself obliged, if I can, to
rid the town of him finally.'

'Shake hands, Sir,' cried Mahony, forgetting his rhetoric in his
enthusiasm; 'be the hole in the wall, Sir, I honour you.'






When Puddock, having taken a short turn or two in the air, by way of
tranquillising his mind, mounted his lodging stairs, he found Lieutenant
O'Flaherty, not at all more sober than he had last seen him, in the
front drawing-room, which apartment was richly perfumed with powerful
exhalations of rum punch.

'Dhrink this, Puddock--dhrink it,' said O'Flaherty, filling a large
glass in equal quantities with rum and water; 'dhrink it, my sinsare
friend; it will studdy you, it will, upon my honour, Puddock!'

'But--a--thank you, Sir, I am anxious to understand exactly'--said
Puddock. Here he was interrupted by a frightful grin and a 'ha!' from
O'Flaherty, who darted to the door, and seizing his little withered
French servant, who was entering, swung him about the room by his coat
collar.

'So, Sorr, you've been prating again, have you, you desateful, idle old
dhrunken miscreant; you did it on purpose, you blundherin' old hyena;
it's the third jewel you got your masther into; and if I lose my life,
divil a penny iv your wages ye'll ever get--that's one comfort. Yes,
Sorr! this is the third time you have caused me to brew my hands in
human blood; I dono' if it's malice, or only blundherin'. Oh!' he cried,
with a still fiercer shake, 'it's I that wishes I could be sure 'twas
malice, I'd skiver you, heels and elbows, on my sword, and roast you
alive on that fire. Is not it a hard thing, my darlin' Puddock, I can't
find out.' He was still holding the little valet by the collar, and
stretching out his right hand to Puddock. 'But I am always the sport of
misfortunes--small and great. If there was an ould woman to be handed in
to supper--or a man to be murthered by mistake--or an ugly girl to be
danced with, whose turn was it, ever and always to do the business, but
poor Hyacinth O'Flaherty's--(tears). I could tell you, Puddock,' he
continued, forgetting his wrath, and letting his prisoner go, in his
eager pathos--the Frenchman made his escape in a twinkling--'I was the
only man in our regiment that tuck the mazles in Cork, when it was goin'
among the children, bad luck to them--I that was near dyin' of it when I
was an infant; and I was the only officer in the regiment, when we were
at Athlone, that was prevented going to the race ball--and I would not
for a hundred pounds. I was to dance the first minuet, and the first
country dance, with that beautiful creature, Miss Rose Cox. I was makin'
a glass of brandy punch--not feelin' quite myself--and I dhressed and
all, in our room, when Ensign Higgins, a most thoughtless young man,
said something disrespectful about a beautiful mole she had on her chin;
bedad, Sir, he called it a wart, if you plase! and feelin' it sthrongly,
I let the jug of scaldin' wather drop on my knees; I wish you felt it,
my darlin' Puddock. I was scalded in half a crack from a fut above my
knees down to the last joint of my two big toes; and I raly thought my
sinses were leving me. I lost the ball by it. Oh, ho, wirresthrue! poor
Hyacinth O'Flaherty!' and thereupon he wept.

'You thee, Lieutenant O'Flaherty,' lisped Puddock, growing impatient,
'we can't say how soon Mr. Nutter's friend may apply for an interview,
and--a--I must confeth I don't yet quite understand the point of
difference between you and him, and therefore--'

'A where the devil's that blackguard little French wazel gone to?'
exclaimed O'Flaherty, for the first time perceiving that his captive had
escaped. 'Kokang Modate! Do you hear me, Kokang Modate!' he shouted.

'But really, Sir, you must be so good as to place before me, before me,
Sir, clearly, the--the cause of this unhappy dispute, the exact offenth,
Thir, for otherwithe--'

'Cause, to be sure! and plenty iv cause. I never fought a jewel yet,
Puddock, my friend--and this will be the ninth--without cause. They
said, I'm tould, in Cork, I was quarrelsome; they lied; I'm not
quarrelsome; I only want pace, and quiet, and justice; I hate a
quarrelsome man. I tell you, Puddock, if I only knew where to find a
quarrelsome man, be the powers I'd go fifty miles out of my way to pull
him be the nose. They lied, Puddock, my dear boy, an' I'd give twenty
pounds this minute I had them on this flure, to tell them how damnably
they lied!'

'No doubt, Thir,' said Puddock, 'but if you pleathe I really mutht have
a dithtinct answer to my--'

'Get out o' that, Sorr,' thundered O'Flaherty, with an awful stamp on
the floor, as the 'coquin maudit,' O'Flaherty's only bit of French, such
as it was, in obedience to that form of invocation, appeared nervously
at the threshold, 'or I'll fling the contints of the r-r-oo-oo-oom at
your head, (exit Monsieur, again). Be gannies! if I thought it was he
that done it, I'd jirk his old bones through the top of the window. Will
I call him back and give him his desarts, will I, Puddock! Oh, ho, hone!
my darlin' Puddock, everything turns agin me; what'll I do, Puddock,
jewel, or what's to become o' me?' and he shed some more tears, and
drank off the greater part of the beverage which he had prepared for
Puddock.

'I believe, Sir, that this is the sixth time I've ventured to ask a
distinct statement from your lips, of the cauthe of your dithagreement
with Mr. Nutter, which I plainly tell you, Thir, I don't at prethent
underthtand, said Puddock, loftily and firmly enough.

'To be sure, my darlin' Puddock,' replied O'Flaherty, 'it was that
cursed little French whipper-snapper, with his monkeyfied
intherruptions; be the powers, Puddock, if you knew half the mischief
that same little baste has got me into, you would not wondher if I
murthered him. It was he was the cause of my jewel with my cousin, Art
Considine, and I wanting to be the very pink of politeness to him. I
wrote him a note when he came to Athlone, afther two years in France,
and jist out o' compliment to him, I unluckily put in a word of French:
come an' dine, says I, and we'll have a dish of chat. I knew u-n p-l-a-t
(spelling it), was a dish, an' says I to Jerome, that pigimy (so he
pronounced it) you seen here at the door, that's his damnable name,
what's chat in French--c-h-a-t--spelling it to him; "sha," says he;
"sha?" says I, "spell it, if you plase," says I; "c-h-a-t," says he, the
stupid old viper. Well, I took the trouble to write it out, "un plat de
chat;" "is that right?" says I, showing it to him. "It is, my lord,"
says he, looking at me as if I had two heads. I never knew the manin' of
it for more than a month afther I shot poor Art through the two calves.
An' he that fought two jewels before, all about cats, one of them with a
Scotch gentleman that he gave the lie to, for saying that French cooks
had a way of stewing cats you could not tell them from hares; and the
other immadiately afther, with Lieutenant Rugge, of the Royal Navy, that
got one stewed for fun, and afther my Cousin Art dined off it, like a
man, showed him the tail and the claws. It's well he did not die of it,
and no wondher he resented my invitation, though upon my honour, as a
soldier and a gentleman, may I be stewed alive myself in a pot, Puddock
my dear, if I had the laste notion of offering him the smallest
affront!'

'I begin to despair, Sir,' exclaimed Puddock, 'of receiving the
information without which 'tis vain for me to try to be useful to you;
once more, may I entreat to know what is the affront of which you
complain?'

'You don't know; raly and truly now, you don't know?' said O'Flaherty,
fixing a solemn tipsy leer on him.

'I tell you no, Thir,' rejoined Puddock.

'And do you mean to tell me you did not hear that vulgar dog Nutter's
unmanly jokes?'

'Jokes!' repeated Puddock, in large perplexity, 'why I've been here in
this town for more than five years, and I never heard in all that time
that Nutter once made a joke--and upon my life, I don't think he could
make a joke, Sir, if he tried--I don't, indeed, Lieutenant O'Flaherty,
upon my honour!'

And rat it, Sir, how can I help it?' cried O'Flaherty, relapsing into
pathos.

'Help what?' demanded Puddock.

O'Flaherty took him by the hand, and gazing on his face with a maudlin,
lacklustre tenderness, said:--

'Absalom was caught by the hair of his head--he was, Puddock--long hair
or short hair, or (a hiccough) no hair at all, isn't it nature's doing,
I ask you my darlin' Puddock, isn't it?' He was shedding tears again
very fast. 'There was Cicero and Julius CÃ¦sar, wor both as bald as
that,' and he thrust a shining sugar basin, bottom upward, into
Puddock's face. 'I'm not bald; I tell you I'm not--no, my darlin'
Puddock, I'm not--poor Hyacinth O'Flaherty is not bald,' shaking
Puddock by both hands.

'That's very plain, Sir, but I don't see your drift,' he replied.

'I want to tell you, Puddock, dear, if you'll only have a minute's
patience. The door can't fasten, divil bother it; come into the next
room;' and toppling a little in his walk, he led him solemnly into his
bed-room--the door of which he locked--somewhat to Puddock's
disquietude, who began to think him insane. Here having informed Puddock
that Nutter was driving at the one point the whole evening, as any one
that knew the secret would have seen; and having solemnly imposed the
seal of secrecy upon his second, and essayed a wild and broken discourse
upon the difference between total baldness and partial loss of hair, he
disclosed to him the grand mystery of his existence, by lifting from the
summit of his head a circular piece of wig, which in those days they
called I believe, a 'topping,' leaving a bare shining disc exposed,
about the size of a large pat of butter.

'Upon my life, Thir, it'th a very fine piethe of work,' says Puddock,
who viewed the wiglet with the eye of a stage-property man, and held it
by a top lock near the candle. 'The very finetht piethe of work of the
kind I ever thaw. 'Tith thertainly French. Oh, yeth--we can't do such
thingth here. By Jove, Thir, what a wig that man would make for Cato!'

'An' he must be a mane crature--I say, a mane crature,' pursued
O'Flaherty, 'for there was not a soul in the town but Jerome, the--the
treacherous ape, that knew it. It's he that dhresses my head every
morning behind the bed-curtain there, with the door locked. And Nutter
could never have found it out--who was to tell him, unless that ojus
French damon, that's never done talkin' about it;' and O'Flaherty strode
heavily up and down the room with his hands in his breeches' pockets,
muttering savage invectives, pitching his head from side to side, and
whisking round at the turns in a way to show how strongly he was wrought
upon.

'Come in, Sorr!' thundered O'Flaherty, unlocking the door, in reply to a
knock, and expecting to see his 'ojus French damon.' But it was a tall
fattish stranger, rather flashily dressed, but a little soiled, with a
black wig, and a rollicking red face, showing a good deal of chin and
jaw.

O'Flaherty made his grandest bow, quite forgetting the exposure at the
top of his head; and Puddock stood rather shocked, with the candle in
one hand and O'Flaherty's scalp in the other.

'You come, Sir, I presume, from Mr. Nutter,' said O'Flaherty, with lofty
courtesy. This, Sir, is my friend, Lieutenant Puddock of the Royal Irish
Artillery, who does me the honour to support me with his advice and--'

As he moved his hand towards Puddock, he saw his scalp dangling between
that gentleman's finger and thumb, and became suddenly mute. He clapped
his hand upon his bare skull, and made an agitated pluck at that
article, but missed, and disappeared, with an imprecation in Irish,
behind the bed curtains.

'If you will be so obliging, Sir, as to precede me into that room,'
lisped Puddock, with grave dignity, and waving O'Flaherty's scalp
slightly towards the door--for Puddock never stooped to hide anything,
and being a gentleman, pure and simple, was not ashamed or afraid to
avow his deeds, words, and situations; 'I shall do myself the honour to
follow.'

'Gi' me that,' was heard in a vehement whisper from behind the
curtains. Puddock understood it, and restored the treasure.

The secret conference in the drawing-room was not tedious, nor indeed
very secret, for anyone acquainted with the diplomatic slang in which
such affairs were conducted might have learned in the lobby, or indeed
in the hall, so mighty was the voice of the stranger, that there was no
chance of any settlement without a meeting which was fixed to take place
at twelve o'clock next day on the Fifteen Acres.






Old Sally always attended her young mistress while she prepared for
bed--not that Lilias required help, for she had the spirit of neatness
and a joyous, gentle alacrity, and only troubled the good old creature
enough to prevent her thinking herself grown old and useless.

Sally, in her quiet way, was garrulous, and she had all sorts of
old-world tales of wonder and adventure, to which Lilias often went
pleasantly to sleep; for there was no danger while old Sally sat
knitting there by the fire, and the sound of the rector's mounting upon
his chairs, as was his wont, and taking down and putting up his books in
the study beneath, though muffled and faint, gave evidence that that
good and loving influence was awake and busy.

Old Sally was telling her young mistress, who sometimes listened with a
smile, and sometimes lost a good five minutes together of her gentle
prattle, how the young gentleman, Mr. Mervyn, had taken that awful old
haunted habitation, the Tiled House 'beyant at Ballyfermot,' and was
going to stay there, and wondered no one had told him of the mysterious
dangers of that desolate mansion.

It stood by a lonely bend of the narrow road. Lilias had often looked
upon the short, straight, grass-grown avenue with an awful curiosity at
the old house which she had learned in childhood to fear as the abode of
shadowy tenants and unearthly dangers.

'There are people, Sally, nowadays, who call themselves free-thinkers,
and don't believe in anything--even in ghosts,' said Lilias.

'A then the place he's stopping in now, Miss Lily, 'ill soon cure him of
free-thinking, if the half they say about it's true,' answered Sally.

'But I don't say, mind, he's a free-thinker, for I don't know anything
of Mr. Mervyn; but if he be not, he must be very brave, or very good,
indeed. I know, Sally, I should be horribly afraid, indeed, to sleep in
it myself,' answered Lilias, with a cosy little shudder, as the aÃ«rial
image of the old house for a moment stood before her, with its peculiar
malign, sacred, and skulking aspect, as if it had drawn back in shame
and guilt under the melancholy old elms among the tall hemlock and
nettles.

'And now, Sally, I'm safe in bed. Stir the fire, my old darling.' For
although it was the first week in May, the night was frosty. 'And tell
me all about the Tiled House again, and frighten me out of my wits.'

So good old Sally, whose faith in such matters was a religion, went off
over the well-known ground in a gentle little amble--sometimes subsiding
into a walk as she approached some special horror, and pulling up
altogether--that is to say, suspending her knitting, and looking with a
mysterious nod at her young mistress in the four-poster, or lowering her
voice to a sort of whisper when the crisis came.

So she told her how when the neighbours hired the orchard that ran up to
the windows at the back of the house, the dogs they kept there used to
howl so wildly and wolfishly all night among the trees, and prowl under
the walls of the house so dejectedly, that they were fain to open the
door and let them in at last; and, indeed, small need was there for
dogs; for no one, young or old, dared go near the orchard after
night-fall. No, the burnished golden pippins that peeped through the
leaves in the western rays of evening, and made the mouths of the
Ballyfermot school-boys water, glowed undisturbed in the morning
sunbeams, and secure in the mysterious tutelage of the night smiled
coyly on their predatory longings. And this was no fanciful reserve and
avoidance. Mick Daly, when he had the orchard, used to sleep in the loft
over the kitchen; and he swore that within five or six weeks, while he
lodged there, he twice saw the same thing, and that was a lady in a hood
and a loose dress, her head drooping, and her finger on her lip, walking
in silence among the crooked stems, with a little child by the hand, who
ran smiling and skipping beside her. And the Widow Cresswell once met
them at night-fall, on the path through the orchard to the back-door,
and she did not know what it was until she saw the men looking at one
another as she told it.

'It's often she told it to me,' said old Sally; 'and how she came on
them all of a sudden at the turn of the path, just by the thick clump of
alder trees; and how she stopped, thinking it was some lady that had a
right to be there; and how they went by as swift as the shadow of a
cloud, though she only seemed to be walking slow enough, and the little
child pulling by her arm, this way and that way, and took no notice of
her, nor even raised her head, though she stopped and courtesied. And
old Dalton, don't you remember old Dalton, Miss Lily?'

'I think I do, the old man who limped, and wore the old black wig?'

'Yes, indeed, acushla, so he did. See how well she remembers! That was
by a kick of one of the earl's horses--he was groom there,' resumed
Sally. 'He used to be troubled with hearing the very sounds his master
used to make to bring him and old Oliver to the door, when he came back
late. It was only on very dark nights when there was no moon. They used
to hear all on a sudden, the whimpering and scraping of dogs at the hall
door, and the sound of the whistle, and the light stroke across the
window with the lash of the whip, just like as if the earl himself--may
his poor soul find rest--was there. First the wind 'id stop, like you'd
be holding your breath, then came these sounds they knew so well, and
when they made no sign of stirring or opening the door, the wind 'id
begin again with such a hoo-hoo-o-o-high, you'd think it was laughing,
and crying, and hooting all at once.'

Here old Sally's tale and her knitting ceased for a moment, as if she
were listening to the wind outside the haunted precincts of the Tiled
house; and she took up her parable again.

'The very night he met his death in England, old Oliver, the butler, was
listening to Dalton--for Dalton was a scholar--reading the letter that
came to him through the post that day, telling him to get things ready,
for his troubles wor nearly over and he expected to be with them again
in a few days, and maybe almost as soon as the letter; and sure enough,
while he was reading, there comes a frightful rattle at the window, like
some one all in a tremble, trying to shake it open, and the earl's
voice, as they both conceited, cries from outside, "Let me in, let me
in, let me in!" "It's him," says the butler. "'Tis so, bedad," says
Dalton, and they both looked at the windy, and at one another--and then
back again--overjoyed, in a soart of a way, and frightened all at onst.
Old Oliver was bad with the rheumatiz. So away goes Dalton to the
hall-door, and he calls "who's there?" and no answer. "Maybe," says
Dalton, to himself, "'tis what he's rid round to the back-door;" so to
the back-door with him, and there he shouts again--and no answer, and
not a sound outside--and he began to feel quare, and to the hall door
with him back again. "Who's there? do you hear? who's there?" he shouts,
and receives no answer still. "I'll open the door at any rate," says he,
"maybe it's what he's made his escape," for they knew all about his
troubles, and wants to get in without noise, so praying all the
time--for his mind misgave him it might not be all right--he shifts the
bars and unlocks the door; but neither man, woman, nor child, nor horse,
nor any living shape was standing there, only something or another slipt
into the house close by his leg; it might be a dog, or something that
way, he could not tell, for he only seen it for a moment with the corner
of his eye, and it went in just like as if it belonged to the place. He
could not see which way it went, up or down, but the house was never a
happy one, or a quiet house after; and Dalton bangs the hall-door, and
he took a sort of a turn and a trembling, and back with him to Oliver,
the butler, looking as white as the blank leaf of his master's letter,
that was between his finger and thumb. "What is it? what is it?" says
the butler, catching his crutch like a waypon, fastening his eyes on
Dalton's white face, and growing almost as pale himself. "The master's
dead," says Dalton--and so he was, signs on it.

'After the turn she got by what she seen in the orchard, when she came
to know the truth of what it was, Jinny Cresswell, you may be sure, did
not stay there an hour longer than she could help: and she began to take
notice of things she did not mind before--such as when she went into the
big bed-room over the hall, that the lord used to sleep in, whenever she
went in at one door the other door used to be pulled to very quick, as
if some one avoiding her was getting out in haste; but the thing that
frightened her most was just this--that sometimes she used to find a
long straight mark from the head to the foot of her bed, as if 'twas
made by something heavy lying there, and the place where it was used to
feel warm--as if--whoever it was--they only left it as she came into the
room.

'But the worst of all was poor Kitty Haplin, the young woman that died
of what she seen. Her mother said it was how she was kept awake all the
night with the walking about of some one in the next room, tumbling
about boxes, and pulling over drawers, and talking and sighing to
himself, and she, poor thing, wishing to go asleep, and wondering who it
could be, when in he comes, a fine man, in a sort of loose silk
morning-dress, an' no wig, but a velvet cap on, and to the windy with
him quiet and aisy, and she makes a turn in the bed to let him know
there was some one there, thinking he'd go away, but instead of that,
over he comes to the side of the bed, looking very bad, and says
something to her--but his speech was thick and choakin' like a dummy's
that id be trying to spake--and she grew very frightened, and says she,
'I ask your honour's pardon, Sir, but I can't hear you right,' and with
that he stretches up his neck nigh out of his cravat, turning his face
up towards the ceiling, and--grace between us and harm!--his throat was
cut across, and wide open; she seen no more, but dropped in a dead faint
in the bed, and back to her mother with her in the morning, and she
never swallied bit or sup more, only she just sat by the fire holding
her mother's hand, crying and trembling, and peepin' over her shoulder,
and starting with every sound, till she took the fever and died, poor
thing, not five weeks after.'

And so on, and on, and on flowed the stream of old Sally's narrative,
while Lilias dropped into dreamless sleep, and then the story-teller
stole away to her own tidy bed-room and innocent slumbers.






I'm sure she believed every word she related, for old Sally was
veracious. But all this was worth just so much as such talk commonly
is--marvels, fabulÃ¦, what our ancestors called winter's tales--which
gathered details from every narrator, and dilated in the act of
narration. Still it was not quite for nothing that the house was held to
be haunted. Under all this smoke there smouldered just a little spark of
truth--an authenticated mystery, for the solution of which some of my
readers may possibly suggest a theory, though I confess I can't.

Miss Rebecca Chattesworth, in a letter dated late in the autumn of 1753,
gives a minute and curious relation of occurrences in the Tiled House,
which, it is plain, although at starting she protests against all such
fooleries, she has heard with a peculiar sort of interest, and relates
it certainly with an awful sort of particularity.

I was for printing the entire letter, which is really very singular as
well as characteristic. But my publisher meets me with his veto; and I
believe he is right. The worthy old lady's letter is, perhaps, too
long; and I must rest content with a few hungry notes of its tenor.

That year, and somewhere about the 24th October, there broke out a
strange dispute between Mr. Alderman Harper, of High Street, Dublin, and
my Lord Castlemallard, who, in virtue of his cousinship to the young
heir's mother, had undertaken for him the management of the tiny estate
on which the Tiled or Tyled House--for I find it spelt both ways--stood.

This Alderman Harper had agreed for a lease of the house for his
daughter, who was married to a gentleman named Prosser. He furnished it,
and put up hangings, and otherwise went to considerable expense. Mr. and
Mrs. Prosser came there sometime in June, and after having parted with a
good many servants in the interval, she made up her mind that she could
not live in the house, and her father waited on Lord Castlemallard, and
told him plainly that he would not take out the lease because the house
was subjected to annoyances which he could not explain. In plain terms,
he said it was haunted, and that no servants would live there more than
a few weeks, and that after what his son-in-law's family had suffered
there, not only should he be excused from taking a lease of it, but that
the house itself ought to be pulled down as a nuisance and the habitual
haunt of something worse than human malefactors.

Lord Castlemallard filed a bill in the Equity side of the Exchequer to
compel Mr. Alderman Harper to perform his contract, by taking out the
lease. But the Alderman drew an answer, supported by no less than seven
long affidavits, copies of all which were furnished to his lordship, and
with the desired effect; for rather than compel him to place them upon
the file of the court, his lordship struck, and consented to release
him.

I am sorry the cause did not proceed at least far enough to place upon
the files of the court the very authentic and unaccountable story which
Miss Rebecca relates.

The annoyances described did not begin till the end of August, when, one
evening, Mrs. Prosser, quite alone, was sitting in the twilight at the
back parlour window, which was open, looking out into the orchard, and
plainly saw a hand stealthily placed upon the stone window-sill outside,
as if by some one beneath the window, at her right side, intending to
climb up. There was nothing but the hand, which was rather short but
handsomely formed, and white and plump, laid on the edge of the
window-sill; and it was not a very young hand, but one aged, somewhere
about forty, as she conjectured. It was only a few weeks before that the
horrible robbery at Clondalkin had taken place, and the lady fancied
that the hand was that of one of the miscreants who was now about to
scale the windows of the Tiled House. She uttered a loud scream and an
ejaculation of terror, and at the same moment the hand was quietly
withdrawn.

Search was made in the orchard, but no indications of any person's
having been under the window, beneath which, ranged along the wall,
stood a great column of flower-pots, which it seemed must have prevented
any one's coming within reach of it.

The same night there came a hasty tapping, every now and then, at the
window of the kitchen. The women grew frightened, and the servant-man,
taking firearms with him, opened the back-door, but discovered nothing.
As he shut it, however, he said, 'a thump came on it,' and a pressure as
of somebody striving to force his way in, which frightened him; and
though the tapping went on upon the kitchen window panes, he made no
further explorations.

About six o'clock on the Saturday evening following, the cook, 'an
honest, sober woman, now aged nigh sixty years,' being alone in the
kitchen, saw, on looking up, it is supposed, the same fat but
aristocratic-looking hand, laid with its palm against the glass, near
the side of the window, and this time moving slowly up and down, pressed
all the while against the glass, as if feeling carefully for some
inequality in its surface. She cried out, and said something like a
prayer on seeing it. But it was not withdrawn for several seconds after.

After this, for a great many nights, there came at first a low, and
afterwards an angry rapping, as it seemed with a set of clenched
knuckles at the back-door. And the servant-man would not open it, but
called to know who was there; and there came no answer, only a sound as
if the palm of the hand was placed against it, and drawn slowly from
side to side with a sort of soft, groping motion.

All this time, sitting in the back parlour, which, for the time, they
used as a drawing-room, Mr. and Mrs. Prosser were disturbed by rappings
at the window, sometimes very low and furtive, like a clandestine
signal, and at others sudden, and so loud as to threaten the breaking of
the pane.

This was all at the back of the house, which looked upon the orchard as
you know. But on a Tuesday night, at about half-past nine, there came
precisely the same rapping at the hall-door, and went on, to the great
annoyance of the master and terror of his wife, at intervals, for nearly
two hours.

After this, for several days and nights, they had no annoyance
whatsoever, and began to think that nuisance had expended itself. But on
the night of the 13th September, Jane Easterbrook, an English maid,
having gone into the pantry for the small silver bowl in which her
mistress's posset was served, happening to look up at the little window
of only four panes, observed through an auger-hole which was drilled
through the window frame, for the admission of a bolt to secure the
shutter, a white pudgy finger--first the tip, and then the two first
joints introduced, and turned about this way and that, crooked against
the inside, as if in search of a fastening which its owner designed to
push aside. When the maid got back into the kitchen we are told 'she
fell into "a swounde," and was all the next day very weak.'

Mr. Prosser being, I've heard, a hard-headed and conceited sort of
fellow, scouted the ghost, and sneered at the fears of his family. He
was privately of opinion that the whole affair was a practical joke or a
fraud, and waited an opportunity of catching the rogue flagrante
delicto. He did not long keep this theory to himself, but let it out by
degrees with no stint of oaths and threats, believing that some domestic
traitor held the thread of the conspiracy.

Indeed it was time something were done; for not only his servants, but
good Mrs. Prosser herself, had grown to look unhappy and anxious. They
kept at home from the hour of sunset, and would not venture about the
house after night-fall, except in couples.

The knocking had ceased for about a week; when one night, Mrs. Prosser
being in the nursery, her husband, who was in the parlour, heard it
begin very softly at the hall-door. The air was quite still, which
favoured his hearing distinctly. This was the first time there had been
any disturbance at that side of the house, and the character of the
summons was changed.

Mr. Prosser, leaving the parlour-door open, it seems, went quietly into
the hall. The sound was that of beating on the outside of the stout
door, softly and regularly, 'with the flat of the hand.' He was going to
open it suddenly, but changed his mind; and went back very quietly, and
on to the head of the kitchen stair, where was a 'strong closet' over
the pantry, in which he kept his firearms, swords, and canes.

Here he called his man-servant, whom he believed to be honest, and, with
a pair of loaded pistols in his own coat-pockets, and giving another
pair to him, he went as lightly as he could, followed by the man, and
with a stout walking-cane in his hand, forward to the door.

Everything went as Mr. Prosser wished. The besieger of his house, so far
from taking fright at their approach, grew more impatient; and the sort
of patting which had aroused his attention at first assumed the rhythm
and emphasis of a series of double-knocks.

Mr. Prosser, angry, opened the door with his right arm across, cane in
hand. Looking, he saw nothing; but his arm was jerked up oddly, as it
might be with the hollow of a hand, and something passed under it, with
a kind of gentle squeeze. The servant neither saw nor felt anything, and
did not know why his master looked back so hastily, cutting with his
cane, and shutting the door with so sudden a slam.

From that time Mr. Prosser discontinued his angry talk and swearing
about it, and seemed nearly as averse from the subject as the rest of
his family. He grew, in fact, very uncomfortable, feeling an inward
persuasion that when, in answer to the summons, he had opened the
hall-door, he had actually given admission to the besieger.

He said nothing to Mrs. Prosser, but went up earlier to his bed-room,
'where he read a while in his Bible, and said his prayers.' I hope the
particular relation of this circumstance does not indicate its
singularity. He lay awake a good while, it appears; and, as he supposed,
about a quarter past twelve he heard the soft palm of a hand patting on
the outside of the bed-room door, and then brushed slowly along it.

Up bounced Mr. Prosser, very much frightened, and locked the door,
crying, 'Who's there?' but receiving no answer but the same brushing
sound of a soft hand drawn over the panels, which he knew only too well.

In the morning the housemaid was terrified by the impression of a hand
in the dust of the 'little parlour' table, where they had been unpacking
delft and other things the day before. The print of the naked foot in
the sea-sand did not frighten Robinson Crusoe half so much. They were by
this time all nervous, and some of them half-crazed, about the hand.

Mr. Prosser went to examine the mark, and made light of it but as he
swore afterwards, rather to quiet his servants than from any
comfortable feeling about it in his own mind; however, he had them all,
one by one, into the room, and made each place his or her hand, palm
downward, on the same table, thus taking a similar impression from every
person in the house, including himself and his wife; and his 'affidavit'
deposed that the formation of the hand so impressed differed altogether
from those of the living inhabitants of the house, and corresponded with
that of the hand seen by Mrs. Prosser and by the cook.

Whoever or whatever the owner of that hand might be, they all felt this
subtle demonstration to mean that it was declared he was no longer out
of doors, but had established himself in the house.

And now Mrs. Prosser began to be troubled with strange and horrible
dreams, some of which as set out in detail, in Aunt Rebecca's long
letter, are really very appalling nightmares. But one night, as Mr.
Prosser closed his bed-chamber-door, he was struck somewhat by the utter
silence of the room, there being no sound of breathing, which seemed
unaccountable to him, as he knew his wife was in bed, and his ears were
particularly sharp.

There was a candle burning on a small table at the foot of the bed,
beside the one he held in one hand, a heavy ledger, connected with his
father-in-law's business being under his arm. He drew the curtain at the
side of the bed, and saw Mrs. Prosser lying, as for a few seconds he
mortally feared, dead, her face being motionless, white, and covered
with a cold dew; and on the pillow, close beside her head, and just
within the curtains, was, as he first thought, a toad--but really the
same fattish hand, the wrist resting on the pillow, and the fingers
extended towards her temple.

Mr. Prosser, with a horrified jerk, pitched the ledger right at the
curtains, behind which the owner of the hand might be supposed to stand.
The hand was instantaneously and smoothly snatched away, the curtains
made a great wave, and Mr. Prosser got round the bed in time to see the
closet-door, which was at the other side, pulled to by the same white,
puffy hand, as he believed.

He drew the door open with a fling, and stared in: but the closet was
empty, except for the clothes hanging from the pegs on the wall, and the
dressing-table and looking-glass facing the windows. He shut it sharply,
and locked it, and felt for a minute, he says, 'as if he were like to
lose his wits;' then, ringing at the bell, he brought the servants, and
with much ado they recovered Mrs. Prosser from a sort of 'trance,' in
which, he says, from her looks, she seemed to have suffered 'the pains
of death:' and Aunt Rebecca adds, 'from what she told me of her visions,
with her own lips, he might have added, "and of hell also."'

But the occurrence which seems to have determined the crisis was the
strange sickness of their eldest child, a little boy aged between two
and three years. He lay awake, seemingly in paroxysms of terror, and the
doctors who were called in, set down the symptoms to incipient water on
the brain. Mrs. Prosser used to sit up with the nurse by the nursery
fire, much troubled in mind about the condition of her child.

His bed was placed sideways along the wall, with its head against the
door of a press or cupboard, which, however, did not shut quite close.
There was a little valance, about a foot deep, round the top of the
child's bed, and this descended within some ten or twelve inches of the
pillow on which it lay.

They observed that the little creature was quieter whenever they took it
up and held it on their laps. They had just replaced him, as he seemed
to have grown quite sleepy and tranquil, but he was not five minutes in
his bed when he began to scream in one of his frenzies of terror; at the
same moment the nurse, for the first time, detected, and Mrs. Prosser
equally plainly saw, following the direction of her eyes, the real
cause of the child's sufferings.

Protruding through the aperture of the press, and shrouded in the shade
of the valance, they plainly saw the white fat hand, palm downwards,
presented towards the head of the child. The mother uttered a scream,
and snatched the child from its little bed, and she and the nurse ran
down to the lady's sleeping-room, where Mr. Prosser was in bed, shutting
the door as they entered; and they had hardly done so, when a gentle tap
came to it from the outside.

There is a great deal more, but this will suffice. The singularity of
the narrative seems to me to be this, that it describes the ghost of a
hand, and no more. The person to whom that hand belonged never once
appeared: nor was it a hand separated from a body, but only a hand so
manifested and introduced that its owner was always, by some crafty
accident, hidden from view.

In the year 1819, at a college breakfast, I met a Mr. Prosser--a thin,
grave, but rather chatty old gentleman, with very white hair drawn back
into a pigtail--and he told us all, with a concise particularity, a
story of his cousin, James Prosser, who, when an infant, had slept for
some time in what his mother said was a haunted nursery in an old house
near Chapelizod, and who, whenever he was ill, over-fatigued, or in
anywise feverish, suffered all through his life as he had done from a
time he could scarce remember, from a vision of a certain gentleman, fat
and pale, every curl of whose wig, every button and fold of whose laced
clothes, and every feature and line of whose sensual, benignant, and
unwholesome face, was as minutely engraven upon his memory as the dress
and lineaments of his own grandfather's portrait, which hung before him
every day at breakfast, dinner, and supper.

Mr. Prosser mentioned this as an instance of a curiously monotonous,
individualised, and persistent nightmare, and hinted the extreme horror
and anxiety with which his cousin, of whom he spoke in the past tense as
'poor Jemmie,' was at any time induced to mention it.

I hope the reader will pardon me for loitering so long in the Tiled
House, but this sort of lore has always had a charm for me; and people,
you know, especially old people, will talk of what most interests
themselves, too often forgetting that others may have had more than
enough of it.





Next morning Toole, sauntering along the low road towards the mills, as
usual bawling at his dogs, who scampered and nuzzled hither and thither,
round and about him, saw two hackney coaches and a 'noddy' arrive at
'the Brass Castle,' a tall old house by the river, with a little bit of
a flower-garden, half-a-dozen poplars, and a few old privet hedges about
it; and being aware that it had been taken the day before for Mr.
Dangerfield, for three months, he slackened his pace, in the hope of
seeing that personage, of whom he had heard great things, take seisin of
his tabernacle. He was disappointed, however; the great man had not
arrived, only a sour-faced, fussy old lady, Mrs. Jukes, his housekeeper
and a servant-wench and a great lot of boxes and trunks; and so leaving
the coachman grumbling and swearing at the lady, who, bitter, shrill,
and voluble, was manifestly well able to fight her own battles, he
strolled back to the Phoenix, where a new evidence of the impending
arrival met his view in an English groom with three horses, which the
hostler and he were leading into the inn-yard.

There were others, too, agreeably fidgeted about this arrival. The fair
Miss Magnolia, for instance, and her enterprising parent, the agreeable
Mrs. Macnamara: who both as they gaped and peeped from the windows,
bouncing up from the breakfast-table every minute, to the silent
distress of quiet little Major O'Neill, painted all sorts of handsome
portraits, and agreeable landscapes, and cloud-clapped castles, each for
her private contemplation, on the spreading canvas of her hopes.

Dr. Walsingham rode down to the 'Tiled House,' where workmen were
already preparing to make things a little more comfortable. The towering
hall-door stood half open; and down the broad stairs--his tall, slim
figure, showing black against the light of the discoloured
lobby-window--his raven hair reaching to his shoulders--Mervyn, the
pale, large-eyed genius of that haunted place, came to meet him. He led
him into the cedar parlour, the stained and dusty windows of which
opened upon that moss-grown orchard, among whose great trunks and arches
those strange shapes were said sometimes to have walked at night, like
penitents and mourners through cathedral pillars.

It was a reception as stately, but as sombre and as beggarly withal as
that of the Master of Ravenswood, for there were but two chairs in the
cedar-parlour,--one with but three legs, the other without a bottom; so
they were fain to stand. But Mervyn could smile without bitterness and
his desolation had not the sting of actual poverty, as he begged the
rector to excuse his dreary welcome, and hoped that he would find things
better the next time.

Their little colloquy got on very easily, for Mervyn liked the rector,
and felt a confidence in him which was comfortable and almost
exhilarating. The doctor had a cheery, kindly, robust voice, and a good,
honest emphasis in his talk; a guileless blue eye; a face furrowed,
thoughtful, and benevolent; well formed too. He must have been a
handsome curate in his day. Not uncourtly, but honest; the politeness of
a gentle and tender heart; very courteous and popular among ladies,
although he sometimes forgot that they knew no Latin.

So Mervyn drew nigh to him in spirit, and liked him and talked to him
rather more freely [though even that was enigmatically enough] than he
had done to anybody else for a long time. It would seem that the young
man had formed no very distinct plan of life. He appeared to have some
thought of volunteering to serve in America, and some of entering into a
foreign service; but his plans were, I suppose, in nubibus. All that
was plain was that he was restless and eager for some change--any.

It was not a very long visit, you may suppose; and just as Dr.
Walsingham rode out of the avenue, Lord Castlemallard was riding
leisurely by towards Chapelizod, followed by his groom.

His lordship, though he had a drowsy way with him, was esteemed rather
an active man of business, being really, I'm afraid, only what is termed
a fidget: and the fact is, his business would have been better done if
he had looked after it himself a good deal less.

He was just going down to the town to see whether Dangerfield had
arrived, and slackened his pace to allow the doctor to join him, for he
could ride with him more comfortably than with parsons generally, the
doctor being well descended, and having married, besides, into a good
family. He stared, as he passed, at the old house listlessly and
peevishly. He had heard of Mervyn's doings there, and did not like them.

'Yes, Sir, he's a very pretty young, man, and very well dressed,' said
his lordship, with manifest dissatisfaction: 'but I don't like meeting
him, you know. 'Tis not his fault; but one can't help thinking of--of
things! and I'd be glad his friends would advise him not to dress in
velvets, you know--particularly black velvets you can understand. I
could not help thinking, at the time, of a pall, somehow. I'm
not--no--not pleasant near him. No--I--I can't--his face is so pale--you
don't often, see so pale a face--no--it looks like a reflection from one
that's still paler--you understand--and in short, even in his perfumes
there's a taint of--of--you know--a taint of blood, Sir. Then there was
a pause, during which he kept slapping his boot peevishly with his
little riding-whip. 'One can't, of course, but be kind,' he recommenced.
'I can't do much--I can't make him acceptable, you know--but I pity him,
Dr. Walsingham, and I've tried to be kind to him, you know that; for
ten years I had all the trouble, Sir, of a guardian without the
authority of one. Yes, of course we're kind; but body o' me! Sir, he'd
be better any where else than here, and without occupation, you know,
quite idle, and so conspicuous. I promise you there are more than I who
think it. And he has commenced fitting up that vile old house--that vile
house, Sir. It is ready to tumble down--upon my life they say so; Nutter
says so, and Sturk--Dr. Sturk, of the Artillery here--an uncommon
sensible man, you know, says so too. 'Tis a vile house, and ready to
tumble down, and you know the trouble I was put to by that corporation
fellow--a--what's his name--about it; and he can't let it--people's
servants won't stay in it, you know, the people tell such stories about
it, I'm told; and what business has he here, you know? It is all very
fine for a week or so, but they'll find him out, they will, Sir. He may
call himself Mervyn, or Fitzgerald, or Thompson, Sir, or any other name,
but it won't do, Sir. No, Dr. Walsingham, it won't do. The people down
in this little village here, Sir, are plaguy sharp--they're cunning;
upon my life, I believe they are too hard for Nutter.'

In fact, Sturk had been urging on his lordship the purchase of this
little property, which, for many reasons ought to be had a bargain, and
adjoined Lord Castlemallard's, and had talked him into viewing it quite
as an object. No wonder, then, he should look on Mervyn's restorations
and residence, in the light of an impertinence and an intrusion.








Rum disagreed with O'Flaherty confoundedly, but, being sanguine, and
also of an obstinate courage not easily to be put down, and liking that
fluid, and being young withal, he drank it defiantly and liberally
whenever it came in his way. So this morning he announced to his friend
Puddock that he was suffering under a headache 'that 'id burst a pot.'
The gallant fellow's stomach, too, was qualmish and disturbed. He heard
of breakfast with loathing. Puddock rather imperiously insisted on his
drinking some tea, which he abhorred, and of which, in very imperfect
clothing and with deep groans and occasional imprecations on 'that
bastely clar't'--to which he chose to ascribe his indisposition--he
drearily partook.

'I tell you what, Thir,' said Puddock, finding his patient nothing
better, and not relishing the notion of presenting his man in that seedy
condition upon the field: 'I've got a remedy, a very thimple one; it
used to do wondereth for my poor Uncle Neagle, who loved rum shrub,
though it gave him the headache always, and sometimes the gout.'

And Puddock had up Mrs. Hogg, his landlady, and ordered a pair of little
muslin bags about the size of a pistol-cartridge each, which she
promised to prepare in five minutes, and he himself tumbled over the
leaves of his private manuscript quarto, a desultory and miscellaneous
album, stuffed with sonnets on Celia's eye--a lock of hair, or a pansy
here or there pressed between the pages--birthday verses addressed to
Sacharissa, receipts for 'puptons,' 'farces,' &c.; and several for
toilet luxuries, 'Angelica water,' 'The Queen of Hungary's' ditto,
'surfeit waters,' and finally, that he was in search of, to wit, 'My
great Aunt Bell's recipe for purging the head' (good against melancholy
or the headache). You are not to suppose that the volume was slovenly or
in anywise unworthy of a gentleman and officer of those days. It was
bound in red and gold, had two handsome silver-gilt clasps and red
edges, the writing being exquisitely straight and legible, and without a
single blot.

'I have them all except--two--three,' murmured the thoughtful Puddock
when he had read over the list of ingredients. These, however, he got
from Toole, close at hand, and with a little silver grater and a pretty
little agate pocket pestle and mortar--an heirloom derived from poor
Aunt Bell--he made a wonderful powder; 'nutmeg and ginger, cinnamon and
cloves,' as the song says, and every other stinging product of nature
and chemistry which the author of this famous family 'purge for the
head' could bring to remembrance; and certainly it was potent. With
this the cartridges were loaded, the ends tied up, and O'Flaherty,
placed behind a table on which stood a basin, commenced the serious
operation, under Puddock's directions, by introducing a bag at each side
of his mouth, which as a man of honour, he was bound to retain there
until Puddock had had his morning's tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte with the barber.

Those who please to consult old domestic receipt-books of the last
century, will find the whole process very exactly described therein.

'Be the powers, Sorr, that was the stuff!' said O'Flaherty, discussing
the composition afterwards, with an awful shake of his head; 'my chops
wor blazing before you could count twenty.'

It was martyrdom; but anything was better than the incapacity which
threatened, and certainly, by the end of five minutes, his head was
something better. In this satisfactory condition--Jerome being in the
back garden brushing his regimentals, and preparing his other
properties--he suddenly heard voices close to the door, and gracious
powers! one was certainly Magnolia's.

'That born devil, Juddy Carrol,' blazed forth. O'Flaherty, afterwards,
'pushed open the door; it served me right for not being in my bed-room,
and the door locked--though who'd a thought there was such a cruel
eediot on airth--bad luck to her--as to show a leedy into a gentleman,
with scarcely the half of his clothes on, and undhergoin' a soart iv an
operation, I may say.'

Happily the table behind which he stood was one of those old-fashioned
toilet affairs, with the back part, which was turned toward the door,
sheeted over with wood, so that his ungartered stockings and rascally
old slippers, were invisible. Even so, it was bad enough: he was arrayed
in a shabby old silk roquelaire, and there was a towel upon his breast,
pinned behind his neck. He had just a second to pop the basin under the
table, and to whisk the towel violently from under his chin, drying that
feature with merciless violence; when the officious Judy Carrol, Grand
Chamberlain in Jerome's absence, with the facetious grin of a
good-natured lady about to make two people happy, introduced the
bewitching Magnolia, and her meek little uncle, Major O'Neill.

In they came, rejoicing, to ask the gallant fireworker (it was a
different element just now), to make one of a party of pleasure to
Leixlip. O'Flaherty could not so much as hand the young lady a chair; to
emerge from behind the table, or even to attempt a retreat, was of
course not to be thought of in the existing state of affairs. The action
of Puddock's recipe was such as to make his share in the little
complimentary conversation that ensued very indistinct, and to oblige
him, to his disgrace and despair, when the poor fellow tried a smile,
actually to apply his towel hastily to his mouth.

He saw that his visitors observed those symptoms with some perplexity:
the major was looking steadfastly at O'Flaherty's lips, and
unconsciously making corresponding movements with his own, and the fair
Magnolia was evidently full of pleasant surprise and curiosity. I really
think, if O'Flaherty had had a pistol within reach, he would have been
tempted to deliver himself summarily from that agonising situation.

'I'm afraid, lieutenant, you've got the toothache,' said Miss Mag, with
her usual agreeable simplicity.

In his alacrity to assure her there was no such thing, he actually
swallowed one of the bags. 'Twas no easy matter, and he grew very red,
and stared frightfully, and swallowed a draught of water precipitately.
His misery was indeed so great that at the conclusion of a polite little
farewell speech of the major's, he uttered an involuntary groan, and
lively Miss Mag, with an odious titter, exclaimed--

'The little creature's teething, uncle, as sure as you're not; either
that, or he's got a hot potato in his poor little mouzey-wouzey;' and
poor O'Flaherty smiled a great silent moist smile at the well-bred
pleasantry. The major, who did not choose to hear Mag's banter, made a
formal, but rather smiling salute. The lieutenant returned it, and down
came the unlucky mortar and a china plate, on which Puddock had mingled
the ingredients, with a shocking crash and jingle on the bare boards; a
plate and mortar never made such a noise before, O'Flaherty thought,
with a mental imprecation.

'Nothing--hash--'appened--Shur,' said O'Flaherty, whose articulation was
affected a good deal, in terror lest the major should arrest his
departure.

So the major and tall Miss Magnolia, with all her roses and lilies, and
bold broad talk, and her wicked eyes, went down the stairs; and
O'Flaherty, looking with lively emotion in the glass, at the unbecoming
coup-d'oeil, heard that agreeable young lady laughing most riotously
under the windows as she and the major marched away.

It was well for Judy, that, being of the gentler sex, the wrath of the
fireworker could not wreak itself upon her. The oftener he viewed
himself in the pier-glass, trying in vain to think he did not look so
very badly after all, the more bitter were his feelings. Oh, that
villainous old silk morning gown! and his eyes so confoundedly red, and
his hair all dishevelled--bad luck to that clar't! the wig was all
right, that was his only comfort;, and his mouth, 'och, look at it;
twiste its natural size,' though that was no trifle.

'Another week I'll not stop in her lodgings,' cried poor O'Flaherty,
grinning at himself in the glass, 'if she keeps that savage, Judy
Carrol, here a day longer.'

Then he stumbled to the stair-head to call her up for judgment; but
changed his mind, and returned to the looking-glass, blowing the cooling
air in short whistles through his peppered lips--and I'm sorry to say,
blowing out also many an ejaculation and invective, as that sorry sight
met his gaze in the oval mirror, which would have been much better not
uttered.








It was not until Puddock had returned, that the gallant fireworker
recollected all on a sudden that he had swallowed one of the bags.

'Thwallowed?--thwallowed it!' said Puddock, looking very blank and
uncomfortable; 'why, Thir, I told you you were to be very careful.'

'Why, why curse it, it's not, 'tisn't----'

'There was a long pause, and O'Flaherty stared a very frightened and
hideous stare at the proprietor of the red quarto.

'Not what, Thir?' demanded Puddock, briskly, but plainly disconcerted.

'Not anything--anything bad--or, or--there's no use in purtendin',
Puddock,' he resumed, turning quite yellow. 'I see, Sir, I see by your
looks, it's what you think, I'm poisoned!'

'I--I--do not, Thir, think you're poisoned,' he replied indignantly,
but with some flurry; 'that is, there's a great deal in it that could
not pothibly do you harm--there's only one ingredient, yes--or, or, yes,
perhapth three, but thertainly no more, that I don't quite know about,
depend upon it, 'tis nothing--a--nothing--a--seriouthly--a--But why, my
dear Thir, why on earth did you violate the thimple directions--why did
you thwallow a particle of it?'

'Och, why did I let it into my mouth at all--the divil go with it!'
retorted poor O'Flaherty; 'an' wasn't I the born eediot to put them
devil's dumplins inside my mouth? but I did not know what I was
doin'--no more I didn't.'

'I hope your head'th better,' said Puddock, vindicating by that
dignified enquiry the character of his recipe.

'Auch! my head be smathered, what the puck do I care about it?'
O'Flaherty broke out. 'Ah, why the devil, Puddock, do you keep them ould
women's charrums and devilments about you?--you'll be the death of some
one yet, so you will.'

'It's a recipe, Sir,' replied Puddock, with the same dignity 'from
which my great uncle, General Neagle, derived frequent benefit.'

'And here I am,' says O'Flaherty, vehemently; 'and you don't know
whether I'm poisoned or no!'

At this moment he saw Dr. Sturk passing by, and drummed violently at the
window. The doctor was impressed by the summons; for however queer the
apparition, it was plain he was desperately in earnest.

'Let's see the recipe,' said Sturk, drily; 'you think you're poisoned--I
know you do;' poor O'Flaherty had shrunk from disclosing the extent of
his apprehensions, and only beat about the bush; 'and if you be, I lay
you fifty, I can't save you, nor all the doctors in Dublin--show me the
recipe.'

Puddock put it before him, and Sturk looked at the back of the volume
with a leisurely disdain, but finding no title there, returned to the
recipe. They both stared on his face, without breathing, while he conned
it over. When he came about half-way, he whistled; and when he arrived
at the end, he frowned hard; and squeezed his lips together till the red
disappeared altogether, and he looked again at the back of the book, and
then turned it round, once more reading the last line over with a severe
expression.

'And so you actually swallowed this--this devil's dose, Sir, did you?'
demanded Sturk.

'I--I believe he did, some of it; but I warned him, I did, upon my
honour! Now, tell him, did I not warn you, my dear lieutenant, not to
thwallow,' interposed little Puddock, who began to grow confoundedly
agitated; but Sturk, who rather liked shocking and frightening people,
and had a knack of making bad worse, and an alacrity in waxing savage
without adequate cause, silenced him with--

'I p-pity you, Sir,' and 'pity' shot like a pellet from his lips. 'Why
the deuce will you dabble in medicine, Sir? Do you think it's a thing to
be learnt in an afternoon out of the bottom of an old cookery-book?'

'Cookery-book! excuse me, Dr. Sturk,' replied Puddock offended. 'I'm
given to underthtand, Sir, it's to be found in Culpepper.'

'Culpepper!' said Sturk, viciously. 'Cull-poison--you have peppered
him to a purpose, I promise you! How much of it, pray, Sir (to
O'Flaherty,) have you got in your stomach?'

'Tell him, Puddock,' said O'Flaherty, helplessly.

'Only a trifle I assure you,' extenuated Puddock (I need not spell his
lisp), 'in a little muslin bag, about the size of the top joint of a
lady's little finger.'

'Top joint o' the devil!' roared O'Flaherty, bitterly, rousing himself;
'I tell you, Dr. Sturk, it was as big as my thumb, and a miracle it did
not choke me.'

'It may do that job for you yet, Sir,' sneered the doctor with a stern
disgust. 'I dare say you feel pretty hot here?' jerking his finger into
his stomach.

'And--and--and--what is it?--is it--do you think it's anything
--anyways--dangerous?' faltered poor O'Flaherty.

'Dangerous!' responded Sturk, with an angry chuckle--indeed, he was
specially vindictive against lay intruders upon the mystery of his
craft; 'why, yes--ha,--ha!--just maybe a little. It's only poison,
Sir, deadly, barefaced poison!' he began sardonically, with a grin, and
ended with a black glare and a knock on the table, like an auctioneer's
'gone!'

'There are no less than two--three--five mortal poisons in it,' said
the doctor with emphatic acerbity. 'You and Mr. Puddock will allow
that's rather strong.'

O'Flaherty sat down and looked at Sturk, and wiping his damp face and
forehead, he got up without appearing to know where he was going.
Puddock stood with his hands in his breeches pockets, staring with his
little round eyes on the doctor, I must confess, with a very foolish and
rather guilty vacuity all over his plump face, rigid and speechless, for
three or four seconds; then he put his hand, which did actually tremble,
upon the doctor's arm, and he said, very thickly--

'I feel, Sir, you're right; it is my fault, Sir, I've poisoned him
--merthiful goodneth!--I--I--'

Puddock's address acted for a moment on O'Flaherty. He came up to him
pale and queer, like a somnambulist, and shook his fingers very
cordially with a very cold grasp.

'If it was the last word I ever spoke, Puddock, you're a
good-natured--he's a gentleman, Sir--and it was all my own fault; he
warned me, he did, again' swallyin' a dhrop of it--remember what I'm
saying, doctor--'twas I that done it; I was always a botch, Puddock,
an' a fool; and--and--gentlemen--good-bye.'

And the flowered dressing-gown and ungartered stockings disappeared
through the door into the bed-room, from whence they heard a great souse
on the bed, and the bedstead gave a dismal groan.

'Is there;--is there nothing, doctor--for mercy's sake, think--doctor,
do--I conjure you--pray think--there must be something'--urged Puddock,
imploringly.

'Ay, that's the way, Sir, fellows quacking themselves and one another;
when they get frightened, and with good reason, come to us and expect
miracles; but as in this case, the quantity was not very much, 'tis not,
you see, overpowering, and he may do if he takes what I'll send him.'

Puddock was already at his bedside, shaking his hand hysterically, and
tumbling his words out one over the other--

'You're thafe, my dear Thir--dum thpiro thpero--he thayth--Dr.
Thturk--he can thave you, my dear Thir--my dear lieutenant--my dear
O'Flaherty--he can thave you, Thir--thafe and thound, Thir.'

O'Flaherty, who had turned his face to the wall in the bitterness of his
situation--for like some other men, he had the intensest horror of death
when he came peaceably to his bedside, though ready enough to meet him
with a 'hurrah!' and a wave of his rapier, if he arrived at a moment's
notice, with due dash and eclat--sat up like a shot, and gaping upon
Puddock for a few seconds, relieved himself with a long sigh, a
devotional upward roll of the eyes, and some muttered words, of which
the little ensign heard only 'blessing,' very fervently, and 'catch me
again,' and 'divil bellows it;' and forthwith out came one of the
fireworker's long shanks, and O'Flaherty insisted on dressing, shaving,
and otherwise preparing as a gentleman and an officer, with great gaiety
of heart, to meet his fate on the Fifteen Acres.

In due time arrived the antidote. It was enclosed in a gallipot, and was
what I believe they called an electuary. I don't know whether it is an
obsolete abomination now, but it looked like brick-dust and treacle, and
what it was made of even Puddock could not divine. O'Flaherty, that
great Hibernian athlete, unconsciously winced and shuddered like a child
at sight of it. Puddock stirred it with the tip of a tea-spoon, and
looked into it with inquisitive disgust, and seemed to smell it from a
distance, lost for a minute in inward conjecture, and then with a slight
bow, pushed it ceremoniously toward his brother in arms.

'There is not much the matter with me now--I feel well enough,' said
O'Flaherty, mildly, and eyeing the mixture askance; and after a little
while he looked at Puddock. That disciplinarian understood the look, and
said, peremptorily, shaking up his little powdered head, and lisping
vehemently--

'Lieutenant O'Flaherty, Sir! I insist on your instantly taking that
physic. How you may feel, Sir, has nothing to do with it. If you
hesitate, I withdraw my sanction to your going to the field, Sir.
There's no--there can be--no earthly excuse but a--a miserable
objection to a--swallowing a--recipe, Sir--that isn't--that is may
be--not intended to please the palate, but to save your life,
Sir,--remember. Sir, you've swallowed a--you--you require, Sir--you
don't think I fear to say it, Sir!--you have swallowed that you ought
not to have swallowed, and don't, Sir--don't--for both our sakes--for
Heaven's sake--I implore--and insist--don't trifle, Sir.'

O'Flaherty felt himself passing under the chill and dismal shadow of
death once more, such was the eloquence of Puddock, and so impressible
his own nature, as he followed the appeal of his second. 'Life is
sweet;' and, though the compound was nauseous, and a necessity upon him
of swallowing it in horrid instalments, spoonful after spoonful, yet,
though not without many interruptions, and many a shocking apostrophe,
and even some sudden paroxysms of horror, which alarmed Puddock, he did
contrive to get through it pretty well, except a little residuum in the
bottom, which Puddock wisely connived at.

The clink of a horse-shoe drew Puddock to the window. Sturk riding into
town, reined in his generous beast, and called up to the little
lieutenant.

'Well, he's taken it, eh?'

Puddock smiled a pleasant smile and nodded.

'Walk him about, then, for an hour or so, and he'll do.'

'Thank you, Sir,' said little Puddock, gaily.

'Don't thank me, Sir, either of you, but remember the lesson you've
got,' said the doctor, tartly, and away he plunged into a sharp trot,
with a cling-clang and a cloud of dust. And Puddock followed that
ungracious leech, with a stare of gratitude and admiration, almost with
a benediction. And his anxiety relieved, he and his principal prepared
forthwith to provide real work for the surgeons.








The chronicles of the small-sword and pistol are pregnant with horrid
and absurd illustrations of certain great moral facts. Let them pass. A
duel, we all know, spirit of 'Punch and Judy'--a farce of murder.
Sterne's gallant father expired, or near it, with the point of a
small-sword sticking out two feet between his shoulders, all about a
goose-pie. I often wondered what the precise quarrel was. But these
tragedies smell all over of goose-pie. Why--oh, why--brave Captain
Sterne, as with saucy, flashing knife and fork you sported with the
outworks of that fated structure, was there no augur at thine elbow,
with a shake of his wintry beard, to warn thee that the birds of
fate--thy fate--sat vigilant under that festive mask of crust? Beware,
it is Pandora's pie! Madman! hold thy hand! The knife's point that seems
to thee about to glide through that pasty is palpably levelled at thine
own windpipe! But this time Mephistopheles leaves the revellers to use
their own cutlery; and now the pie is opened; and now the birds begin to
sing! Come along, then to the Fifteen Acres, and let us see what will
come of it all.

That flanking demi-bastion of the Magazine, crenelled for musketry,
commands, with the aid of a couple of good field-glasses, an excellent
and secret view of the arena on which the redoubted O'Flaherty and the
grim Nutter were about to put their metal to the proof. General
Chattesworth, who happened to have an appointment, as he told his sister
at breakfast, in town about that hour, forgot it just as he reached the
Magazine, gave his bridle to the groom, and stumped into the fortress,
where he had a biscuit and a glass of sherry in the commandant's little
parlour, and forth the two cronies sallied mysteriously side by side;
the commandant, Colonel Bligh, being remarkably tall, slim, and
straight, with an austere, mulberry-coloured face; the general stout and
stumpy, and smiling plentifully, short of breath, and double chinned,
they got into the sanctum I have just mentioned.

I don't apologise to my readers, English-born and bred, for assuming
them to be acquainted with the chief features of the 'Phoenix Park,
near Dublin. Irish scenery is now as accessible as Welsh. Let them study
the old problem, not in blue books, but in the green and brown ones of
our fields and heaths, and mountains. If Ireland be no more than a great
capability and a beautiful landscape, faintly visible in the blue haze,
even from your own headlands, and separated by hardly four hours of
water, and a ten-shilling fare, from your jetties, it is your own shame,
not ours, if a nation of bold speculators and indefatigable tourists
leave it unexplored.

So I say, from this coigne of vantage, looking westward over the broad
green level toward the thin smoke that rose from Chapelizod chimneys,
lying so snugly in the lap of the hollow by the river, the famous
Fifteen Acres, where so many heroes have measured swords, and so many
bullies have bit the dust, was distinctly displayed in the near
foreground. You all know the artillery butt. Well, that was the centre
of a circular enclosure containing just fifteen acres, with broad
entrances eastward and westward.

The old fellows knew very well where to look.

Father Roach was quite accidentally there, reading his breviary when the
hostile parties came upon the ground--for except when an accident of
this sort occurred, or the troops were being drilled, it was a
sequestered spot enough--and he forthwith joined them, as usual, to
reconcile the dread debate.

Somehow, I think his arguments were not altogether judicious.

'I don't ask particulars, my dear--I abominate all that concerns a
quarrel; but Lieutenant O'Flaherty, jewel, supposin' the very
worst--supposin', just for argument, that he has horse-whipped you----.'

'An' who dar' suppose it?' glared O'Flaherty.

'Or, we'll take it that he spit in your face, honey. Well,' continued
his reverence, not choosing to hear the shocking ejaculations which this
hypothesis wrung from the lieutenant; 'what of that, my darlin'? Think
of the indignities, insults, and disgraces that the blessed Saint
Martellus suffered, without allowing, anything worse to cross his lips
than an Ave Mary or a smile in resignation.'

'Ordher the priest off the ground, Sorr,' said O'Flaherty, lividly, to
little Puddock, who was too busy with Mr. Mahony to hear him; and Roach
had already transferred his pious offices to Nutter, who speedily
flushed up and became, to all appearances, in his own way just as angry
as O'Flaherty.

'Lieutenant O'Flaherty, a word in your ear,' once more droned the mellow
voice of Father Roach; 'you're a young man, my dear, and here's
Lieutenant Puddock by your side, a young man too; I'm as ould, my
honeys, as the two of you put together, an' I advise you, for your
good--don't shed human blood--don't even draw your swords--don't, my
darlins; don't be led or said by them army-gentlemen, that's always
standin' up for fightin' because the leedies admire fightin' men.
They'll call you cowards, polthroons, curs, sneaks, turn-tails--let
them!'

'There's no standin' this any longer, Puddock,' said O'Flaherty,
incensed indescribably by the odious names which his reverence was
hypothetically accumulating; 'if you want to see the fightin', Father
Roach----.'

'Apage, Sathanas!' murmured his reverence, pettishly, raising his plump,
blue chin, and dropping his eyelids with a shake of the head, and waving
the back of his fat, red hand gently towards the speaker.

'In that case, stay here, an' look your full, an' welcome, only don't
make a noise; behave like a Christian, an' hould your tongue; but if you
really hate fightin', as you say----'

Having reached this point in his address, but intending a good deal
more, O'Flaherty suddenly stopped short, drew himself into a stooping
posture, with a flush and a strange distortion, and his eyes fastened
upon Father Roach with an unearthly glare for nearly two minutes, and
seized Puddock upon the upper part of his arm with so awful a grip, in
his great bony hand, that the gallant little gentleman piped out in a
flurry of anguish--

'O--O--O'Flaherty, Thir--let go my arm, Thir.'

O'Flaherty drew a long breath, uttered a short, deep groan, and wiping
the moisture from his red forehead, and resuming a perpendicular
position, was evidently trying to recover the lost thread of his
discourse.

'There'th dethidedly thomething the matter with you, Thir,' said
Puddock, anxiously, sotto voce, while he worked his injured arm's a
little at the shoulder.

'You may say that,' said O'Flaherty, very dismally, and, perhaps, a
little bitterly.

'And--and--and--you don't mean to thay--why--eh?' asked Puddock,
uneasily.

'I tell you what, Puddock--there's no use in purtendin'--the poison's
working--that's what's the matter,' returned poor O'Flaherty, in what
romance writers call 'a hissing whisper.'

'Good--merthiful--graciouth--Thir!' ejaculated poor little Puddock, in a
panic, and gazing up into the brawny fireworker's face with a pallid
fascination; indeed they both looked unpleasantly unlike the popular
conception of heroes on the eve of battle.

'But--but it can't be--you forget Dr. Sturk and--oh, dear!--the
antidote. It--I thay--it can't be, Thir,' said Puddock, rapidly.

'It's no use, now; but I shirked two or three spoonfuls, and I left some
more in the bottom,' said the gigantic O'Flaherty, with a gloomy
sheepishness.

Puddock made an ejaculation--the only violent one recorded of him--and
turning his back briskly upon his principal, actually walked several
steps away, as if he intended to cut the whole concern. But such a
measure was really not to be thought of.

'O'Flaherty--Lieutenant--I won't reproach you,' began Puddock.

'Reproach me! an' who poisoned me, my tight little fellow?' retorted
the fireworker, savagely.

Puddock could only look at him, and then said, quite meekly--

'Well, and my dear Thir, what on earth had we better do?'

'Do,' said O'Flaherty, 'why isn't it completely Hobson's choice with us?
What can we do but go through with it?'

The fact is, I may as well mention, lest the sensitive reader should be
concerned for the gallant O'Flaherty, that the poison had very little to
do with it, and the antidote a great deal. In fact, it was a reckless
compound conceived in a cynical and angry spirit by Sturk, and as the
fireworker afterwards declared, while expressing in excited language his
wonder how Puddock (for he never suspected Sturk's elixir) had contrived
to compound such a poison--'The torture was such, my dear Madam, as
fairly thranslated me into the purlieus of the other world.'

Nutter had already put off his coat and waistcoat, and appeared in a
neat little black lutestring vest, with sleeves to it, which the elder
officers of the R.I.A. remembered well in by-gone fencing matches.

'Tis a most miserable situation,' said Puddock, in extreme distress.

'Never mind,' groaned O'Flaherty, grimly taking off his coat; 'you'll
have two corpses to carry home with you; don't you show the laste
taste iv unaisiness, an' I'll not disgrace you, if I'm spared to see
it out.'

And now preliminaries were quite adjusted; and Nutter, light and wiry, a
good swordsman, though not young, stepped out with his vicious weapon in
hand, and his eyes looking white and stony out of his dark face. A word
or two to his armour-bearer, and a rapid gesture, right and left, and
that magnificent squire spoke low to two or three of the surrounding
officers, who forthwith bestirred themselves to keep back the crowd, and
as it were to keep the ring unbroken. O'Flaherty took his sword, got his
hand well into the hilt, poised the blade, shook himself up as it were,
and made a feint or two and a parry in the air, and so began to advance,
like Goliath, towards little Nutter.

'Now, Puddock, back him up--encourage your man,' said Devereux, who took
a perverse pleasure in joking; 'tell him to flay the lump, splat him,
divide him, and cut him in two pieces----.

It was a custom of the corps to quiz Puddock about his cookery; but
Puddock, I suppose, did not hear his last night's 'receipt' quoted, and
he kept his eye upon his man, who had now got nearly within fencing
distance of his adversary. But at this critical moment, O'Flaherty, much
to Puddock's disgust, suddenly stopped, and got into the old stooping
posture, making an appalling grimace in what looked like an endeavour to
swallow, not only his under lip, but his chin also. Uttering a
quivering, groan, he continued to stoop nearer to the earth, on which he
finally actually sat down and hugged his knees close to his chest,
holding his breath all the time till he was perfectly purple, and
rocking himself this way and that.

The whole procedure was a mystery to everybody except the guilty
Puddock, who changed colour, and in manifest perturbation, skipped to
his side.

'Bleth me--bleth me--my dear O'Flaherty, he'th very ill--where ith the
pain?'

'Is it "farced pain," Puddock, or "gammon pain?"' asked Devereux, with
much concern.

Puddock's plump panic-stricken little face, and staring eye-balls, were
approached close to the writhing features of his redoubted principal--as
I think I have seen honest Sancho Panza's, in one of Tony Johannot's
sketches, to that of the prostrate Knight of the Rueful Countenance.

'I wish to Heaven I had thwallowed it myself--it'th dreadful--what ith
to be--are you eathier--I think you're eathier.'

I don't think O'Flaherty heard him. He only hugged his knees tighter,
and slowly turned up his face, wrung into ten thousand horrid puckers,
to the sky, till his chin stood as high as his forehead, with his teeth
and eyes shut, and he uttered a sound like a half-stifled screech; and,
indeed, looked very black and horrible.

Some of the spectators, rear-rank men, having but an imperfect view of
the transaction, thought that O'Flaherty had been hideously run through
the body by his solemn opponent, and swelled the general chorus of
counsel and ejaculation, by all together advising cobwebs, brown-paper
plugs, clergymen, brandy, and the like; but as none of these comforts
were at hand, and nobody stirred, O'Flaherty was left to the resources
of Nature.

Puddock threw his cocked hat upon the ground and stamped in a momentary
frenzy.

'He'th dying--Devereux--Cluffe--he'th--I tell you, he'th dying;' and
he was on the point of declaring himself O'Flaherty's murderer, and
surrendering himself as such into the hands of anybody who would accept
the custody of his person, when the recollection of his official
position as poor O'Flaherty's second flashed upon him, and collecting
with a grand effort, his wits and his graces--

'It'th totally impothible, gentlemen,' he said, with his most
ceremonious bow; 'conthidering the awful condition of my
printhipal--I--I have reathon to fear--in fact I know--Dr. Thturk has
theen him--that he'th under the action of poithon--and it'th quite
impractithable, gentlemen, that thith affair of honour can protheed at
prethent;' and Puddock drew himself up peremptorily, and replaced his
hat, which somebody had slipped into his hand, upon his round powdered
head.

Mr. Mahony, though a magnificent gentleman, was, perhaps, a little
stupid, and he mistook Puddock's agitation, and thought he was in a
passion, and disposed to be offensive. He, therefore, with a marked and
stern sort of elegance, replied--

'Pison, Sir, is a remarkably strong alpathet; it's language, Sir,
which, if a gentleman uses at all, he's bound in justice, in shivalry,
and in dacency to a generous adversary, to define with precision. Mr.
Nutter is too well known to the best o'society, moving in a circle as he
does, to require the panegyric of humble me. They drank together last
night, they differed in opinion, that's true, but fourteen clear hours
has expired, and pison being mentioned----'

'Why, body o' me! Sir,' lisped Puddock, in fierce horror; 'can you
imagine for one moment, Sir, that I or any man living could suppose for
an instant, that my respected friend, Mr. Nutter, to whom (a low bow to
Nutter, returned by that gentleman) I have now the misfortune to be
opposed, is capable--capable, Sir, of poisoning any living being--man,
woman, or child; and to put an end, Sir, at once to all misapprehension
upon this point, it was I--I, Sir--myself--who poisoned him,
altogether accidentally, of course, by a valuable, but mismanaged
receipt, this morning, Sir--you--you see, Mr. Nutter!'

Nutter, balked of his gentlemanlike satisfaction, stared with a
horrified but somewhat foolish countenance from Puddock to O'Flaherty.

'And now, Thir,' pursued Puddock, addressing himself to Mr. Mahony, 'if
Mr. Nutter desires to postpone the combat, I consent; if not, I offer
mythelf to maintain it inthead of my printhipal.'

And so he made another low bow, and stood bareheaded, hat in hand, with
his right hand on his sword hilt.

'Upon my honour, Captain Puddock, it's precisely what I was going to
propose myself, Sir,' said Mahony, with great alacrity; 'as the only way
left us of getting honourably out of the great embarrassment in which we
are placed by the premature death-struggles of your friend; for
nothing, Mr. Puddock, but being bonÃ¢ fide in articulo mortis, can
palliate his conduct.'

'My dear Puddock,' whispered Devereux, in his ear, 'surely you would not
kill Nutter to oblige two such brutes as these?' indicating by a glance
Nutter's splendid second and the magnanimous O'Flaherty, who was still
sitting speechless upon the ground.

'Captain Puddock,' pursued that mirror of courtesy, Mr. Patrick Mahony,
of Muckafubble, who, by-the-bye, persisted in giving him his captaincy,
may I enquire who's your friend upon this unexpected turn of affairs?'

'There's no need, Sir,' said Nutter, dryly and stoutly, 'I would not
hurt a hair of your head, Lieutenant Puddock.'

'Do you hear him?' panted O'Flaherty, for the first time articulate, and
stung by the unfortunate phrase--it seemed fated that Nutter should not
open his lips without making some allusion to human hair: 'do you hear
him, Puddock? Mr. Nutter--(he spoke with great difficulty, and in
jerks)--Sir--Mr. Nutter--you shall--ugh--you shall render a strict
accow-ow-oh-im-m-m!'

The sound was smothered under his compressed lips, his face wrung itself
again crimson with a hideous squeeze, and Puddock thought the moment of
his dissolution was come, and almost wished it over.

'Don't try to speak--pray, Sir, don't--there--there, now,' urged
Puddock, distractedly; but the injunction was unnecessary.

'Mr. Nutter,' said his second sulkily, 'I don't see anything to satisfy
your outraged honour in the curious spectacle of that gentleman sitting
on the ground making faces; we came here not to trifle, but, as I
conceive, to dispatch business, Sir.'

'To dispatch that unfortunate gentleman, you mean, and that seems pretty
well done to your hand,' said little Dr. Toole, bustling up from the
coach where his instruments, lint, and plasters were deposited. 'What's
it all, eh?--oh, Dr. Sturk's been with him, eh? Oh, ho, ho, ho!' and
he laughed sarcastically, in an undertone, and shrugged, as he stooped
down and took O'Flaherty's pulse in his fingers and thumb.

'I tell you what, Mr. a--a--a--Sir,' said Nutter, with a very dangerous
look; 'I have had the honour of knowing Lieutenant Puddock since August,
1756; I won't hurt him, for I like and respect him; but, if fight I
must, I'll fight you, Sir!'

'Since August, 1756?' repeated Mr. Mahony, with prompt surprise. 'Pooh!
why didn't you mention that before? Why, Sir, he's an old friend, and
you could not pleasantly ask him to volunteer to bare his waypon
against the boosom of his friend. No, Sir, shivalry is the handmaid of
Christian charity, and honour walks hand in hand with the human heart!'

With this noble sentiment he bowed and shook Nutter's cold, hard hand,
and then Puddock's plump little white paw.

You are not to suppose that Pat Mahoney, of Muckafubble, was a poltroon;
on the contrary, he had fought several shocking duels, and displayed a
remarkable amount of savagery and coolness; but having made a character,
he was satisfied therewith. They may talk of fighting for the fun of it,
liking it, delighting in it; don't believe a word of it. We all hate it,
and the hero is only he who hates it least.'

'Ugh, I can't stand it any longer; take me out of this, some of you,'
said O'Flaherty, wiping the damp from his red face. 'I don't think
there's ten minutes' life in me.'

'De profundis conclamavi,' murmured fat father Roach; 'lean upon me,
Sir.'

'And me,' said little Toole.

'For the benefit of your poor soul, my honey, just say you forgive Mr.
Nutter before you leave the field,' said the priest quite sincerely.

'Anything at all, Father Roach,' replied the sufferer; 'only don't
bother me.'

'You forgive him then, aroon?' said the priest.

'Och, bother! forgive him, to be sure I do. That's supposin', mind, I
don't recover; but if I do----.'

'Och, pacible, pacible, my son,' said Father Roach, patting his arm, and
soothing him with his voice. It was the phrase he used to address to his
nag, Brian O'Lynn, when Brian had too much oats, and was disagreeably
playful. 'Nansinse, now, can't you be pacible--pacible my son--there
now, pacible, pacible.'

Upon his two supporters, and followed by his little second, this
towering sufferer was helped, and tumbled into the coach, into which
Puddock, Toole, and the priest, who was curious to see O'Flaherty's last
moments, all followed; and they drove at a wild canter--for the coachman
was 'hearty'--over the green grass, and toward Chapelizod, though Toole
broke the check-string without producing any effect, down the hill,
quite frightfully, and were all within an ace of being capsized. But
ultimately they reached, in various states of mind, but safely enough,
O'Flaherty's lodgings.

Here the gigantic invalid, who had suffered another paroxysm on the way,
was slowly assisted to the ground by his awestruck and curious friends,
and entered the house with a groan, and roared for Judy Carroll with a
curse, and invoked Jerome, the cokang modate, with horrible
vociferation. And as among the hushed exhortations of the good priest,
Toole and Puddock, he mounted the stairs, he took occasion over the
banister, in stentorian tones, to proclaim to the household his own
awful situation, and the imminent approach of the moment of his
dissolution.






The old gentlemen, from their peepholes in the Magazine, watched the
progress of this remarkable affair of honour, as well as they could,
with the aid of their field-glasses, and through an interposing crowd.

'By Jupiter, Sir, he's through him!' said Colonel Bligh, when he saw
O'Flaherty go down.

'So he is, by George!' replied General Chattesworth; 'but, eh, which is
he?'

'The long fellow,' said Bligh.

'O'Flaherty?--hey!--no, by George!--though so it is--there's work in
Frank Nutter yet, by Jove,' said the general, poking his glass and his
fat face an inch or two nearer.

'Quick work, general!' said Bligh.

'Devilish,' replied the general.

The two worthies never moved their glasses; as each, on his inquisitive
face, wore the grim, wickedish, half-smile, with which an old stager
recalls, in the prowess of his juniors, the pleasant devilment of his
own youth.

'The cool, old hand, Sir, too much for your new fireworker,' remarked
Bligh, cynically.

'Tut, Sir, this O'Flaherty has not been three weeks among us,'
spluttered out the general, who was woundily jealous of the honour of
his corps. 'There are lads among our fireworkers who would whip Nutter
through the liver while you'd count ten!'

'They're removing the--the--(a long pause) the body, eh?' said Bligh.
'Hey! no, see, by George, he's walking but he's hurt.'

'I'm mighty well pleased it's no worse, Sir,' said the general, honestly
glad.

'They're helping him into the coach--long legs the fellow's got,'
remarked Bligh.

'These--things--Sir--are--are--very--un--pleasant,' said the general,
adjusting the focus of the glass, and speaking slowly--though no Spanish
dandy ever relished a bull-fight more than he an affair of the kind. He
and old Bligh had witnessed no less than five--not counting this--in
which officers of the R.I.A. were principal performers, from the same
sung post of observation. The general, indeed, was conventionally
supposed to know nothing of them, and to reprobate the practice itself
with his whole soul. But somehow, when an affair of the sort came off on
the Fifteen Acres, he always happened to drop in, at the proper moment,
upon his old crony, the colonel, and they sauntered into the
demi-bastion together, and quietly saw what was to be seen. It was Miss
Becky Chattesworth who involved the poor general in this hypocrisy. It
was not exactly her money; it was her force of will and unflinching
audacity that established her control over an easy, harmless, plastic
old gentleman.

'They are unpleasant--devilish unpleasant--somewhere in the body, I
think, hey? they're stooping again, stooping again--eh?--plaguy
unpleasant, Sir (the general was thinking how Miss Becky's tongue would
wag, and what she might not even do, if O'Flaherty died). Ha! on they
go again, and a--Puddock--getting in--and that's Toole. He's not so much
hurt--eh? He helped himself a good deal, you saw; but (taking heart of
grace) when a quarrel does occur, Sir, I believe, after all, 'tis better
off the stomach at once--a few passes--you know--or the crack of a
pistol--who's that got in--the priest--hey? by George!'

'Awkward if he dies a Papist,' said cynical old Bligh--the R.I.A. were
Protestant by constitution.

'That never happens in our corps, Sir,' said the general, haughtily;
'but, as I say, when a quarrel--does--occur--Sir--there, they're off at
last; when it does occur--I say--heyday! what a thundering pace! a
gallop, by George! that don't look well (a pause)--and--and--a--about
what you were saying--you know he couldn't die a Papist in our
corps--no one does--no one ever did--it would be, you know--it would
be a trick, Sir, and O'Flaherty's a gentleman; it could not be--(he
was thinking of Miss Becky again--she was so fierce on the Gunpowder
Plot, the rising of 1642, and Jesuits in general, and he went on a
little flustered); but then, Sir, as I was saying, though the thing has
its uses----.'

'I'd like to know where society'd be without it,' interposed Bligh, with
a sneer.

'Though it may have its uses, Sir; it's not a thing one can sit down and
say is right--we can't!'

'I've heard your sister, Miss Becky, speak strongly on that point,
too,'said Bligh.

'Ah! I dare say,' said the general, quite innocently, an coughing a
little. This was a sore point with the hen-pecked warrior, and the grim
scarcecrow by his side knew it, and grinned through his telescope; 'and
you see--I say--eh! I think they're breaking up, a--and--I say--I--it
seems all over--eh--and so, dear colonel, I must take my leave, and----.'

And after a lingering look, he shut up his glass, and walking
thoughtfully back with his friend, said suddenly--

'And, now I think of it--it could not be that--Puddock, you know,
would not suffer the priest to sit in the same coach with such a
design--Puddock's a good officer, eh! and knows his duty.'

A few hours afterwards, General Chattesworth, having just dismounted
outside the Artillery barracks, to his surprise, met Puddock and
O'Flaherty walking leisurely in the street of Chapelizod. O'Flaherty
looked pale and shaky, and rather wild; and the general returned his
salute, looking deuced hard at him, and wondering all the time in what
part of his body (in his phrase) 'he had got it;' and how the plague the
doctors had put him so soon on his legs again.

'Ha, Lieutenant Puddock,' with a smile, which Puddock thought
significant--'give you good-evening, Sir. Dr. Toole anywhere about, or
have you seen Sturk?'

'No, he had not.'

The general wanted to hear by accident, or in confidence, all about it;
and having engaged Puddock in talk, that officer followed by his side.

'I should be glad of the honour of your company, Lieutenant Puddock, to
dinner this evening--Sturk comes, and Captain Cluffe, and this wonderful
Mr. Dangerfield too, of whom we all heard so much at mess, at five
o'clock, if the invitation's not too late.'

The lieutenant acknowledged and accepted, with a blush and a very low
bow, his commanding officer's hospitality; in fact, there was a tendre
in the direction of Belmont, and little Puddock had inscribed in his
private book many charming stanzas of various lengths and structures, in
which the name of 'Gertrude' was of frequent recurrence.

'And--a--I say, Puddock--Lieutenant O'Flaherty, I thought--I--I thought,
d'ye see, just now, eh? (he looked inquisitively, but there was no
answer); I thought, I say, he looked devilish out of sorts, is
he--a--ill?'

'He was very ill, indeed, this afternoon, general; a sudden attack----'

The general looked quickly at Puddock's plump, consequential face; but
there was no further light in it. 'He was hurt then, I knew it'--he
thought--'who's attending him--and why is he out--and was it a
flesh-wound--or where was it?' all these questions silently, but
vehemently, solicited an answer--and he repeated the last aloud, in a
careless sort of way.

'And--a--Lieutenant Puddock, you were saying--a--tell me--now--where
was it?'

'In the park, general,' said Puddock, in perfect good faith.

'Eh? ah! in the park, was it? but I want to know, you know, what part of
the body--d'ye see--the shoulder--or?----'

'The duodenum, Dr. Toole called it--just here, general,' and he pressed
his fingers to what is vulgarly known as the 'pit' of his stomach.

'What, Sir, do you mean to say the pit of his stomach?' said the
general, with more horror and indignation than he often showed.

'Yes, just about that point, general, and the pain was very violent
indeed,' answered Puddock, looking with a puzzled stare at the general's
stern and horrified countenance--an officer might have a pain in his
stomach, he thought, without exciting all that emotion. Had he heard of
the poison, and did he know more of the working of such things than,
perhaps, the doctors did?

'And what in the name of Bedlam, Sir, does he mean by walking about the
town with a hole through his--his what's his name? I'm hanged but I'll
place him under arrest this moment,' the general thundered, and his
little eyes swept the perspective this way and that, as if they would
leap from their sockets, in search of the reckless O'Flaherty. 'Where's
the adjutant, Sir?' he bellowed with a crimson scowl and a stamp, to the
unoffending sentry.

'That's the way to make him lie quiet, and keep his bed till he heals,
Sir.'

Puddock explained, and the storm subsided, rumbling off in half a dozen
testy assertions on the general's part that he, Puddock, had distinctly
used the word 'wounded,' and now and then renewing faintly, in a
muttered explosion, on the troubles and worries of his command, and a
great many 'pshaws!' and several fits of coughing, for the general
continued out of breath for some time. He had showed his cards, however,
and so, in a dignified disconcerted sort of way, he told Puddock that he
had heard something about O'Flaherty's having got most improperly into a
foolish quarrel, and having met Nutter that afternoon, and for a moment
feared he might have been hurt; and then came enquiries about Nutter,
and there appeared to have been no one hurt, and yet the parties on the
ground--and no fighting--and yet no reconciliation--and, in fact, the
general was so puzzled with this conundrum, and so curious, that he was
very near calling after Puddock, when they parted at the bridge, and
making him entertain him, at some cost of consistency, with the whole
story.

So Puddock--his head full of delicious visions--marched homeward--to
powder and perfume, and otherwise equip for that banquet of the gods, of
which he was to partake at five o'clock, and just as he turned the
corner at 'The Phoenix,' who should he behold, sailing down the Dublin
road from the King's House, with a grand powdered footman, bearing his
cane of office, and a great bouquet behind her, and Gertrude
Chattesworth by her side, but the splendid and formidable Aunt Becky,
who had just been paying her compliments to old Mrs. Colonel Stafford,
from whom she had heard all about the duel. So as Puddock's fat cheeks
grew pink at sight of Miss Gertrude, all Aunt Becky's colour flushed
into her face, as her keen eye pierced the unconscious lieutenant from
afar off, and chin and nose high in air, her mouth just a little tucked
in, as it were, at one corner--a certain sign of coming storm--an angry
hectic in each cheek, a fierce flirt of her fan, and two or three short
sniffs that betokened mischief--she quickened her pace, leaving her
niece a good way in the rear, in her haste to engage the enemy. Before
she came up she commenced the action at a long range, and very
abruptly--for an effective rhetorician of Aunt Becky's sort, jumps at
once, like a good epic poet, in medias res; and as Nutter, who, like
all her friends in turn, experienced once or twice 'a taste of her
quality,' observed to his wife, 'by Jove, that woman says things for
which she ought to be put in the watch-house.' So now and here she
maintained her reputation--

'You ought to be flogged, Sir; yes,' she insisted, answering Puddock's
bewildered stare, 'tied up to the halberts and flogged.'

Aunt Rebecca was accompanied by at least half a dozen lap-dogs, and
those intelligent brutes, aware of his disgrace, beset poor Puddock's
legs with a furious vociferation.

'Madam,' said he, his ears tingling, and making a prodigious low bow;
'commissioned officers are never flogged.'

'So much the worse for the service, Sir; and the sooner they abolish
that anomalous distinction the better. I'd have them begin, Sir, with
you, and your accomplice in murder, Lieutenant O'Flaherty.'

'Madam! your most obedient humble servant,' said Puddock, with another
bow, still more ceremonious, flushing up intensely to the very roots of
his powdered hair, and feeling in his swelling heart that all the
generals of all the armies of Europe dare not have held such language to
him.

'Good-evening, Sir,' said Aunt Becky, with an energetic toss of her
head, having discharged her shot; and with an averted countenance, and
in high disdain, she swept grandly on, quite forgetting her niece, who
said a pleasant word or two to Puddock as she passed, and smiled so
kindly, and seemed so entirely unconscious of his mortification, that he
was quite consoled, and on the whole was made happy and elated by the
rencontre, and went home to his wash-balls and perfumes in a hopeful and
radiant, though somewhat excited state.

Indeed, the little lieutenant knew that kind-hearted termagant, Aunt
Becky, too well, to be long cast down or even flurried by her onset.
When the same little Puddock, about a year ago, had that ugly attack of
pleurisy, and was so low and so long about recovering, and so puny and
fastidious in appetite, she treated him as kindly as if he were her own
son, in the matter of jellies, strong soups, and curious light wines,
and had afterwards lent him some good books which the little lieutenant
had read through, like a man of honour as he was. And, indeed, what
specially piqued Aunt Becky's resentment just now was, that having had,
about that time, a good deal of talk with Puddock upon the particular
subject of duelling, he had, as she thought, taken very kindly to her
way of thinking; and she had a dozen times in the last month, cited
Puddock to the general; and so his public defection was highly
mortifying and intolerable.

So Puddock, in a not unpleasant fuss and excitement, sat down in his
dressing-gown before the glass; and while Moore the barber, with tongs,
powder, and pomade, repaired the dilapidations of the day, he
contemplated his own plump face, not altogether unapprovingly, and
thought with a charming anticipation of the adventures of the
approaching evening.






Puddock drove up the avenue of gentlemanlike old poplars, and over the
little bridge, and under the high-arched bowers of elms, walled up at
either side with evergreens, and so into the court-yard of Belmont.
Three sides of a parellelogram, the white old house being the largest,
and offices white and in keeping, but overgrown with ivy, and opening to
yards of their own on the other sides, facing one another at the flanks,
and in front a straight Dutch-like moat, with a stone balustrade running
all along from the garden to the bridge, with great stone flower pots
set at intervals, the shrubs and flowers of which associated themselves
in his thoughts with beautiful Gertrude Chattesworth, and so were
wonderfully bright and fragrant. And there were two swans upon the
water, and several peacocks marching dandily in the court-yard; and a
grand old Irish dog, with a great collar, and a Celtic inscription,
dreaming on the steps in the evening sun.

It was always pleasant to dine at Belmont. Old General Chattesworth was
so genuinely hospitable and so really glad to see you, and so hilarious
himself, and so enjoying. A sage or a scholar, perhaps, might not have
found a great deal in him. Most of his stories had been heard before.
Some of them, I am led to believe, had even been printed. But they were
not very long, and he had a good natured word and a cordial smile for
everybody; and he had a good cook, and explained his dishes to those
beside him, and used sometimes to toddle out himself to the cellar in
search of a curious bon-bouche; and of nearly every bin in it he had a
little anecdote or a pedigree to relate. And his laugh was frequent and
hearty, and somehow the room and all in it felt the influence of his
presence like the glow, and cheer, and crackle of a bright Christmas
fire.

Miss Becky Chattesworth, very stately in a fine brocade, and a great
deal of point lace, received Puddock very loftily, and only touched his
hand with the tips of her fingers. It was plain he was not yet taken
into favour. When he entered the drawing-room, that handsome stranger,
with the large eyes, so wonderfully elegant and easy in the
puce-coloured cut velvet--Mr. Mervyn--was leaning upon the high back of
a chair, and talking agreeably, as it seemed, to Miss Gertrude. He had a
shake of the hand and a fashionable greeting from stout, dandified
Captain Cluffe, who was by no means so young as he would be supposed,
and made up industriously and braced what he called his waist, with
great fortitude, and indeed sometimes looked half-stifled, in spite of
his smile and his swagger. Sturk, leaning at the window with his
shoulders to the wall, beckoned Puddock gruffly, and cross-examined him
in an undertone as to the issue of O'Flaherty's case. Of course he knew
all about the duel, but the corps also knew that Sturk would not attend
on the ground in any affair where the Royal Irish Artillery were
concerned, and therefore they could bring what doctor they pleased to
the field without an affront.

'And see, my buck,' said Sturk, winding up rather savagely with a sneer;
'you've got out of that scrape, you and your patient, by a piece of
good luck that's not like to happen twice over; so take my advice, and
cut that leaf out of your--your--grandmother's cookery book, and light
your pipe with it.'

This slight way of treating both his book and his ancestors nettled
little Puddock--who never himself took a liberty, and expected similar
treatment--but he knew Sturk, the nature of the beast, and he only bowed
grandly, and went to pay his respects to cowed, kindly, querulous little
Mrs. Sturk, at the other end of the room. An elderly gentleman, with a
rather white face, a high forehead and grim look, was chatting briskly
with her; and Puddock, the moment his eye lighted on the stranger, felt
that there was something remarkable about him. Taken in detail, indeed,
he was insignificant. He was dressed as quietly as the style of that day
would allow, yet in his toilet, there was entire ease and even a latent
air of fashion. He wore his own hair; and though there was a little
powder upon it and upon his coat collar, it was perfectly white, frizzed
out a little at the sides, and gathered into a bag behind. The stranger
rose and bowed as Puddock approached the lady, and the lieutenant had a
nearer view of his great white forehead--his only good feature--and the
pair of silver spectacles that glimmered under it, and his small hooked
nose and stern mouth.

''Tis a mean countenance,' said the general, talking him over when the
company had dispersed.

'No countenance,' said Miss Becky decisively, 'could be mean with such
a forehead.'

The fact is--if they had cared to analyse--the features, taken
separately, with that one exception, were insignificant; but the face
was singular, with its strange pallor, its intellectual mastery, and
sarcastic decision.

The general, who had accidentally omitted the ceremony--in those days
essential--now strutted up to introduce them.

'Mr. Dangerfield, will you permit me to present my good friend and
officer Lieutenant Puddock. Lieutenant Puddock, Mr Dangerfield--Mr.
Dangerfield, Lieutenant Puddock.'

And there was a great deal of pretty bowing, and each was the other's
'most obedient,' and declared himself honoured; and the conventional
parenthesis ended, things returned to their former course.

Puddock only perceived that Mrs. Sturk was giving Dangerfield a rambling
sort of account of the people of Chapelizod. Dangerfield, to do him
justice, listened attentively. In fact, he had led her upon that
particular theme, and as easily and cleverly kept her close to the
subject. For he was not a general to manoeuvre without knowing first
how the ground lay, and had an active, enquiring mind, in which he made
all sorts of little notes.

So Mrs. Sturk prattled on, to her own and Mr. Dangerfield's content, for
she was garrulous when not under the eye of her lord, and always gentle,
though given to lamentation, having commonly many small hardships to
mention. So, quite without malice or retention, she poured out the
gossip of the town, but not its scandal. Indeed, she was a very
harmless, and rather sweet, though dolorous little body, and was very
fond of children, especially her own, who would have been ruined were it
not that they quailed as much as she did before Sturk, on whom she
looked as by far the cleverest and most awful mortal then extant, and
never doubted that the world thought so too. For the rest, she preserved
her dresses, which were not amiss, for an interminable time, her sheets
were always well aired, her maids often saucy, and she often in tears,
but Sturk's lace and fine-linen were always forthcoming in exemplary
order; she rehearsed the catechism with the children, and loved Dr.
Walsingham heartily, and made more raspberry jam than any other woman of
her means in Chapelizod, except, perhaps, Mrs. Nutter, between whom and
herself there were points of resemblance, but something as nearly a feud
as could subsist between their harmless natures. Each believed the other
matched with a bold bad man, who was always scheming something--they
never quite understood what--against her own peerless lord; each on
seeing the other, hoping that Heaven would defend the right and change
the hearts of her enemies, or, at all events confound their politics;
and each, with a sort of awful second-sight, when they viewed one
another across the street, beholding her neighbour draped in a dark film
of thunder-cloud, and with a sheaf of pale lightning, instead of a fan
flickering in her hand.

When they came down to dinner, the gallant Captain Cluffe contrived to
seat himself beside Aunt Becky, to whom the rogue commended himself by
making a corner on his chair, next hers, for that odious greedy little
brute 'Fancy,' and by a hundred other adroit and amiable attentions. And
having a perfect acquaintance with all her weak points--as everybody had
who lived long in Chapelizod--he had no difficulty in finding topics to
interest her, and in conversing acceptably thereupon. And, indeed,
whenever he was mentioned for some time after, she used to remark, that
Captain Cluffe was a very conversable and worthy young (!) man.

In truth, that dinner went swiftly and pleasantly over for many of the
guests. Gertrude Chattesworth was placed between the enamoured Puddock
and the large-eyed, handsome, mysterious Mervyn. Of course, the hour
flew with light and roseate wings for him. Little Puddock was in great
force, and chatted with energy, and his theatrical lore, and his
oddities, made him not unamusing. So she smiled on him more than usual,
to make amends for the frowns of the higher powers, and he was as happy
as a prince and as proud as a peacock, and quite tipsy with his success.

It is not always easy to know what young ladies like best or least, or
quite what they are driving at; and Cluffe, from the other side of the
table, thought, though Puddock was an agreeable fellow, and exerting
himself uncommonly (for Cluffe, like other men not deep in the literÃ¦
humaniores, had a sort of veneration for 'book learning,' under which
category he placed Puddock's endless odds and ends of play lore, and
viewed the little lieutenant himself accordingly with some awe as a man
of parts and a scholar, and prodigiously admired his verses, which he
only half understood); he fancied, I say, although Puddock was unusually
entertaining, that Miss Gertrude would have been well content to
exchange him for the wooden lay-figure on which she hung her draperies
when she sketched, which might have worn his uniform and filled his
chair, and spared her his agreeable conversation, and which had eyes and
saw not, and ears and heard not.

In short, the cunning fellow fancied he saw, by many small signs, a very
decided preference on her part for the handsome and melancholy, but
evidently eloquent stranger. Like other cunning fellows, however, Cluffe
was not always right; and right or wrong, in his own illusions, if such
they were, little Puddock was, for the time, substantially blessed.

The plump and happy lieutenant, when the ladies had flown away to the
drawing-room and their small tea-cups, waxed silent and sentimental, but
being a generous rival, and feeling that he could afford it, made a
little effort, and engaged Mervyn in talk, and found him pleasantly
versed in many things of which he knew little, and especially in the
Continental stage and drama, upon which Puddock heard him greedily; and
the general's bustling talk helped to keep the company merry, and he
treated them to a bottle of the identical sack of which his own
father's wedding posset had been compounded! Dangerfield, in a rather
harsh voice, but agreeably and intelligently withal, told some rather
pleasant stories about old wines and curious wine fanciers; and Cluffe
and Puddock, who often sang together, being called on by the general,
chanted a duet rather prettily, though neither, separately, had much of
a voice. And the incorrigible Puddock, apropos of a piece of a whale
once eaten by Dangerfield, after his wont, related a wonderful
receipt--'a weaver surprised.' The weaver turned out to be a fish, and
the 'surprising' was the popping him out of ice into boiling water, with
after details, which made the old general shake and laugh till tears
bedewed his honest cheeks. And Mervyn and Dangerfield, as much surprised
as the weaver, both looked, each in his own way, a little curiously at
the young warrior who possessed this remarkable knowledge.

And the claret, like the general's other wines, was very good, and
Dangerfield said a stern word or two in its praise, and guessed its
vintage, to his host's great elation, who, with Lord Castlemallard,
began to think Dangerfield a very wonderful man.

Dr. Sturk alone sipped his claret silently; looking thoughtfully a good
deal at Dangerfield over the way, and when spoken to, seemed to waken
up, but dropped out of the conversation again; though this was odd, for
he had intended giving Dangerfield a bit of his mind as to what might be
made of the Castlemallard estates, and by implication letting in some
light upon Nutter's mismanagement.

When Dr. Sturk had come into the drawing-room before dinner, Dangerfield
was turning over a portfolio in the shade beyond the window, and the
evening sun was shining strongly in his own face; so that during the
ceremony of introduction he had seen next to nothing of him, and then
sauntered away to the bow window at the other end, where the ladies were
assembled, to make his obeisance.

But at the dinner-table, he was placed directly opposite, with the
advantage of a very distinct view; and the face, relieved against the
dark stamped leather hangings on the wall, stood out like a
sharply-painted portrait, and produced an odd and unpleasant effect upon
Sturk, who could not help puzzling himself then, and for a long time
after, with unavailing speculations about him.

The grim white man opposite did not appear to trouble his head about
Sturk. He eat his dinner energetically, chatted laconically, but rather
pleasantly. Sturk thought he might be eight-and-forty, or perhaps six or
seven-and-fifty--it was a face without a date. He went over all his
points, insignificant features, high forehead, stern countenance,
abruptly silent, abruptly speaking, spectacles, harsh voice, harsher
laugh, something sinister perhaps, and used for the most part when the
joking or the story had a flavour of the sarcastic and the devilish.
The image, as a whole, seemed to Sturk to fill in the outlines of a
recollection, which yet was not a recollection. He could not seize it;
it was a decidedly unpleasant impression of having seen him before, but
where he could not bring to mind. 'He got me into some confounded
trouble some time or other,' thought Sturk, in his uneasy dream; 'the
sight of him is like a thump in my stomach. Was he the sheriff's
deputy at Chester, when that rascally Jew-tailor followed me?
Dangerfield--Dangerfield--Dangerfield--no; or could it be that row at
Taunton? or the custom-house officer--let me see--1751; no, he was a
taller man--yes, I remember him; it is not he. Or was he at Dick
Luscome's duel?' and he lay awake half the night thinking of him; for he
was not only a puzzle, but there was a sort of suspicion of danger and
he knew not what, throbbing in his soul whenever his reverie conjured up
that impenetrable, white scoffing face.






Having had as much claret as they cared for, the gentlemen fluttered
gaily into the drawing-room, and Puddock, who made up to Miss Gertrude,
and had just started afresh, and in a rather more sentimental vein, was
a good deal scandalised, and put out by the general's reciting with
jolly emphasis, and calling thereto his daughter's special attention,
his receipt for 'surprising a weaver,' which he embellished with two or
three burlesque improvements of his own, which Puddock, amidst his
blushes and confusion, allowed to pass without a protest. Aunt Rebecca
was the only person present who pointedly refused to laugh; and with a
slight shudder and momentary elevation of her eyes, said, 'wicked and
unnatural cruelty!' at which sentiment Puddock used his
pocket-handkerchief in rather an agitated manner.

''Tis a thing I've never done myself--that is, I've never seen it done,'
said Little Puddock, suffused with blushes, as he pleaded his cause at
the bar of humanity--for those were the days of Howard, and the fair sex
had taken up the philanthropist. 'The--the--receipt--'tis, you see, a
thing I happened to meet--and--and just read it in the--in a book--and
the--I--a----'

Aunt Becky, with her shoulders raised in a shudder, and an agonised and
peremptory 'there, there, there,' moved out of hearing in dignified
disgust, to the general's high entertainment, who enjoyed her assaults
upon innocent Puddock, and indeed took her attacks upon himself, when
executed with moderation, hilariously enough--a misplaced good-humour
which never failed to fire Aunt Becky's just resentment.

Indeed, the general was so tickled with this joke that he kept it going
for the rest of the evening, by sly allusions and mischievous puns. As
for instance, at supper, when Aunt Rebecca was deploring the miserable
depression of the silk manufacture, and the distress of the poor
Protestant artisans of the Liberty, the general, with a solemn wink at
Puddock, and to that officer's terror, came out with--

'Yet, who knows, Lieutenant Puddock, but the weavers, poor fellows, may
be surprised, you know, by a sudden order from the Court, as happened
last year.'

But Aunt Rebecca only raised her eyebrows, and, with a slight toss of
her head, looked sternly at a cold fowl on the other side. But, from
some cause or other--perhaps it was Miss Gertrude's rebellion in
treating the outlawed Puddock with special civility that evening, Miss
Becky's asperity seemed to acquire edge and venom as time proceeded. But
Puddock rallied quickly. He was on the whole very happy, and did not
grudge Mervyn his share of the talk, though he heard him ask leave to
send Miss Gertrude Chattesworth a portfolio of his drawings made in
Venice, to look over, which she with a smile accepted--and at supper,
Puddock, at the general's instigation, gave them a solo, which went off
pretty well, and, as they stood about the fire after it, on a similar
pressure, an imitation of Barry in Othello; and upon this, Miss Becky,
who was a furious partisan of Smock-alley Theatre and Mossop against
Barry, Woodward, and the Crow-street play-house, went off again. Indeed,
this was a feud which just then divided the ladies of all Dublin, and
the greater part of the country, with uncommon acrimony.

'Crow-street was set up,' she harangued, 'to ruin the old house in the
spirit of covetousness, you say' (Puddock had not said a word on the
subject;) 'well, covetousness, we have good authority for saying, is
idolatry--nothing less--idolatry, Sir,--you need not stare.' (Puddock
certainly did stare.) 'I suppose you once read your Bible, Sir, but
every sensible man, woman, child, and infant, Sir, in the kingdom, knows
it was malice; and malice, Holy Writ says, is murder--but I forgot,
that's perhaps no very great objection with Lieutenant Puddock.'

And little Puddock flushed up, and his round eyes grew rounder and
rounder, as she proceeded, every moment; and he did not know what to
say--for it had not struck him before that Messrs. Barry's and
Woodward's theatrical venture might be viewed in the light of idolatry
or murder. So dumfounded as he was, he took half of Lord Chesterfield's
advice in such cases, that is, he forgot the smile, but he made a very
low bow, and, with this submission, the combat (si rixa est) subsided.

Dangerfield had gone away some time--so had Mervyn--Sturk and his wife
went next, and Cluffe and Puddock, who lingered as long as was decent,
at last took leave. The plump lieutenant went away very happy,
notwithstanding the two or three little rubs he had met with, and a good
deal more in love than ever. And he and his companion were both
thoughtful, and the walk home was quite silent, though very pleasant.

Cluffe was giving shape mentally to his designs upon Miss Rebecca's
Â£20,000 and savings. He knew she had had high offers in her young days
and refused; but those were past and gone--and gray hairs bring
wisdom--and women grow more practicable as the time for action
dwindles--and she was just the woman to take a fancy--and 'once the
maggot bit,' to go any honest length to make it fact. And Cluffe knew
that he had the field to himself, and that he was a well-made, handsome,
agreeable officer--not so young as to make the thing absurd, yet young
enough to inspire the right sort of feeling. To be sure, there were a
few things to be weighed. She was, perhaps--well, she was eccentric.
She had troublesome pets and pastimes--he knew them all--was well
stricken in years, and had a will of her own--that was all. But, then,
on the other side was the money--a great and agreeable arithmetical fact
not to be shaken--and she could be well-bred when she liked, and a
self-possessed, dignified lady, who could sail about a room, and
courtesy, and manage her fan, and lead the conversation, and do the
honours, as Mrs. Cluffe, with a certain air of haut ton, and in an
imposing way, to Cluffe's entire content, who liked the idea of
overawing his peers.

And the two warriors, side by side, marched over the bridge, in the
starlight, and both by common consent, halted silently, and wheeled up
to the battlement; and Puddock puffed a complacent little sigh up the
river toward Belmont; and Cluffe was a good deal interested in the
subject of his contemplation, and in fact, the more he thought of it,
the better he liked it.

And they stood, each in his reverie, looking over the battlement toward
Belmont, and hearing the hushed roll of the river, and seeing nothing
but the deep blue, and the stars, and the black outline of the trees
that overhung the bridge, until the enamoured Cluffe, who liked his
comforts, and knew what gout was, felt the chill air, and remembered
suddenly that they had stopped, and ought to be in motion toward their
beds, and so he shook up Puddock, and they started anew, and parted just
at the Phoenix, shaking hands heartily, like two men who had just done
a good stroke of business together.




IRONS GOES A FISHING.


Early next morning Lord Castlemallard, Dangerfield, and Nutter, rode
into Chapelizod, plaguy dusty, having already made the circuit of that
portion of his property which lay west of the town. They had poked into
the new mills and the old mills, and contemplated the quarries, and
lime-kilns, and talked with Doyle about his holding, and walked over the
two vacant farms, and I know not all besides. And away trotted his
lordship to his breakfast in town. And Dangerfield seeing the church
door open, dismounted and walked in, and Nutter did likewise.

Bob Martin was up in the gallery, I suppose, doing some good, and making
a considerable knocking here and there in the pews, and walking slowly
with creaking shoes. Zekiel Irons, the clerk, was down below about his
business, at the communion table at the far end, lean, blue-chinned,
thin-lipped, stooping over his quarto prayer books, and gliding about
without noise, reverent and sinister. When they came in, Nutter led the
way to Lord Castlemallard's pew, which brought them up pretty near to
the spot where grave Mr. Irons was prowling serenely. The pew would soon
want new flooring, Mr. Dangerfield thought, and the Castlemallard arms
and supporters, a rather dingy piece of vainglory, overhanging the main
seat on the wall, would be nothing the worse of a little fresh gilding
and paint.

'There was a claim--eh--to one foot nine inches off the eastern end of
the pew, on the part of--of the family--at Inchicore, I think they call
it,' said Dangerfield, laying his riding-whip like a rule along the top
to help his imagination--'Hey--that would spoil the pew.'

'The claim's settled, and Mr. Langley goes to the other side of the
aisle,' said Nutter, nodding to Irons, who came up, and laid his long
clay-coloured fingers on the top of the pew door, and one long, thin
foot on the first step, and with half-closed eyes, and a half bow, he
awaited their pleasure.

'The Langley family had this pew,' said Dangerfield, with a side nod
to that next his lordship's.

'Yes, Sir,' said Irons, with the same immutable semblance of a smile,
and raising neither his head nor his eyes.

'And who's got it now?'

'His reverence, Dr. Walsingham.'

And so it came out, that having purchased Salmonfalls, the rector had
compromised the territorial war that was on the point of breaking out
among his parishioners, by exchanging with that old coxcomb Langley, the
great square pew over the way, that belonged to that house, for the
queer little crib in which the tenant of Inchicore had hitherto sat in
state; and so there was peace, if not good will, in the church.

'Hey--let's see it,' said Dangerfield, crossing the aisle, with Irons at
his heels, for he was a man that saw everything for himself, that ever
so remotely concerned him or his business.

'We buried Lord ----' (and the title he spoke very low) 'in the vault
here, just under where you stand, on Monday last, by night,' said Irons,
very gently and grimly, as he stood behind Dangerfield.

A faint galvanic thrill shot up through the flagging and his firmly
planted foot to his brain, as though something said, 'Ay, here I am!'

'Oh! indeed?' said Dangerfield, dryly, making a little nod, and raising
his eyebrows, and just moving a little a one side--''Twas a nasty
affair.'

He looked up, with his hands in his breeches' pockets, and read a mural
tablet, whistling scarce audibly the while. It was not reverent, but he
was a gentleman; and the clerk standing behind him, retained his quiet
posture, and that smile, that yet was not a smile, but a sort of
reflected light--was it patience, or was it secret ridicule?--you could
not tell: and it never changed, and somehow it was provoking.

'And some persons, I believe, had an unpleasant duty to do there,' said
Dangerfield, abruptly, in the middle of his tune, and turning his
spectacles fully and sternly on Mr. Irons.

The clerk's head bent lower, and he shook it; and his eyes, but for a
little glitter through the eyelashes, seemed to close.

''Tis a pretty church, this--a pretty town, and some good families in
the neighbourhood,' said Dangerfield, briskly; 'and I dare say some
trout in the river--hey?--the stream looks lively.'

'Middling, only--poor gray troutlings, Sir--not a soul cares to fish it
but myself,' he answered.

'You're the clerk--eh?'

'At your service, Sir.'

'Dublin man?--or--'

'Born and bred in Dublin, your honour.'

'Ay--well! Irons--you've heard of Mr. Dangerfield--Lord Castlemallard's
agent--I am he. Good-morning, Irons;' and he gave him half-a-crown, and
he took another look round; and then he and Nutter went out of the
church, and took a hasty leave of one another, and away went Nutter on
his nag, to the mills. And Dangerfield, just before mounting, popped
into Cleary's shop, and in his grim, laconic way, asked the proprietor,
among his meal-bags and bacon, about fifty questions in less than five
minutes. 'That was one of Lord Castlemallard's houses--eh--with the bad
roof, and manure-heap round the corner?'--and, 'Where's the pot-house
they call the Salmon House?--doing a good business--eh?' and at
last--'I'm told there's some trout in the stream. Is there anyone in the
town who knows the river, and could show me the fishing?--Oh, the clerk!
and what sort of fish is he--hey?--Oh! an honest, worthy man, is he?
Very good, Sir. Then, perhaps, Mr. a--perhaps, Sir, you'll do me the
favour to let one of your people run down to his house, and say Mr.
Dangerfield, Lord Castlemallard's agent, who is staying, you know, at
the Brass Castle, would be much obliged if he would bring his rod and
tackle, and take a walk with him up the river, for a little angling, at
ten o'clock!'

Jolly Phil Cleary was deferential, and almost nervous in his presence.
The silver-haired, grim man, with his mysterious reputation for money,
and that short decisive way of his, and sudden cynical chuckle, inspired
a sort of awe, which made his wishes, where expressed with that intent,
very generally obeyed; and, sure enough, Irons appeared, with his rod,
at the appointed hour, and the interesting anglers--Piscator and his
'honest scholar,' as Isaac Walton hath it--set out side by side on their
ramble, in the true fraternity of the gentle craft.

The clerk had, I'm afraid, a shrew of a wife--shrill, vehement, and
fluent. 'Rogue,' 'old miser,' 'old sneak,' and a great many worse names,
she called him. Good Mrs. Irons was old, fat, and ugly, and she knew it;
and that knowledge made her natural jealousy the fiercer. He had
learned, by long experience, the best tactique under fire: he became
actually taciturn; or, if he spoke, his speech was laconic and
enigmatical; sometimes throwing out a proverb, and sometimes a text; and
sometimes when provoked past endurance, spouting mildly a little bit of
meek and venomous irony.

He loved his trout-rod and the devious banks of the Liffey, where,
saturnine and alone, he filled his basket. It was his helpmate's rule,
whenever she did not know to a certainty precisely what Irons was doing,
to take it for granted that he was about some mischief. Her lodger,
Captain Devereux, was her great resource on these occasions, and few
things pleased him better than a stormy visit from his hostess in this
temper. The young scapegrace would close his novel, and set down his
glass of sherry and water (it sometimes smelt very like brandy, I'm
afraid). To hear her rant, one would have supposed, who had not seen
him, that her lank-haired, grimly partner, was the prettiest youth in
the county of Dublin, and that all the comely lasses in Chapelizod and
the country round were sighing and setting caps at him; and Devereux,
who had a vein of satire, and loved even farce, enjoyed the heroics of
the fat old slut.

'Oh! what am I to do, captain, jewel?' she bounced into the room, with
flaming face and eyes swelled, and the end of her apron, with which she
had been swobbing them, in her hand, while she gesticulated, with her
right; 'there, he's off again to Island Bridge,--the owdacious sneak!
It's all that dirty hussy's doing. I'm not such a fool, but I know how
to put this and that together, though he thinks I don't know of his
doings; but I'll be even with you, Meg Partlet, yet--you trollop;' and
all this was delivered in renewed floods of tears, and stentorian
hysterics, while she shook her fat red fist in the air, at the presumed
level of Meg's beautiful features.

'Nay, Madam,' said the gay captain; 'I prithee, weep not; the like
discoveries, as you have read, have been made in Rome, Salamanca,
Ballyporeen, Babylon, Venice, and fifty other famous cities.' He always
felt in these interviews, as if she and he were extemporising a
burlesque--she the Queen of Crim Tartary, and he an Archbishop in her
court--and would have spoken blank verse, only he feared she might
perceive it, and break up the conference.

'And what's that to the purpose?--don't I know they're the same all over
the world--nothing but brutes and barbarians.'

'But suppose, Madam, he has only gone up the river, and just taken his
rod----'

'Oh! rod, indeed. I know where he wants a rod, the rascal!'

'I tell you, Madam,' urged the chaplain, 'you're quite in the wrong.
You've discovered after twenty years' wedlock that your husband's--a
man! and you're vexed: would you have him anything else?'

'You're all in a story,' she blubbered maniacally; 'there's no justice,
nor feeling, nor succour for a poor abused woman; but I'll do it--I
will. I'll go to his reverence--don't try to persuade me--the Rev. Hugh
Walsingham, Doctor of Divinity, and Rector of Chapelizod (she used to
give him at full length whenever she threatened Zekiel with a visitation
from that quarter, by way of adding ponderosity to the menace)--I'll go
to him straight--don't think to stop me--and we'll see what he'll say;'
and so she addressed herself to go.

'And when you see him, Madam, ask the learned doctor--don't ask
me--believe the rector of the parish--he'll tell you, that it hath
prevailed from the period at which Madam Sarah quarrelled with saucy
Miss Hagar; that it hath prevailed among all the principal nations of
antiquity, according to Pliny, Strabo, and the chief writers of
antiquity; that Juno, Dido, Eleanor Queen of England, and Mrs.
Partridge, whom I read of here (and he pointed to the open volume of Tom
Jones), each made, or thought she made, a like discovery.' And the
captain delivered this slowly, with knitted brow and thoughtful face,
after the manner of the erudite and simple doctor.

'Pretty Partridges, indeed! and nice game for a parish clerk!' cried the
lady, returning. 'I wonder, so I do, when I look at him, and think of
his goings on, how he can have the assurance to sit under the minister,
and look the congregation in the face, and tune his throat, and sing the
blessed psalms.'

'You are not to wonder, Madam; believe the sage, who says, omnibus hoc
vitium est cantoribus.'

Devereux knew of old that the effect of Latin on Mrs. Irons was to
heighten the inflammation, and so the matron burst into whole chapters
of crimination, enlivened with a sprinkling of strong words, as the
sages of the law love to pepper their indictments and informations with
hot adverbs and well-spiced parentheses, 'falsely,' 'scandalously,'
'maliciously,' and suadente diabolo, to make them sit warm on the
stomachs of a loyal judge and jury, and digest easily.

The neighbours were so accustomed to Mrs. Irons' griefs, that when her
voice was audible, as upon such occasions it was, upon the high road and
in the back gardens, it produced next to no sensation; everybody had
heard from that loud oracle every sort of story touching Irons which
could well be imagined, and it was all so thoroughly published by the
good lady, that curiosity on the subject was pretty well dead and gone,
and her distant declamation rattled over their heads and boomed in their
ears, like the distant guns and trumpets on a review day, signifying
nothing.

And all this only shows what every man who has ruralised a little in his
lifetime knows, more than in theory, that the golden age lingers in no
corner of the earth, but is really quite gone and over everywhere, and
that peace and prisca fides have not fled to the nooks and shadows of
deep valleys and bowery brooks, but flown once, and away to heaven
again, and left the round world to its general curse. So it is even in
pretty old villages, embowered in orchards, with hollyhocks and
jessamine in front of the houses, and primeval cocks and hens pecking
and scraping in the street, and the modest river dimpling and simpering
among osiers and apple trees, and old ivied walls close by--you
sometimes hear other things than lowing herds, and small birds singing,
and purling streams; and shrill accents and voluble rhetoric will now
and then trouble the fragrant air, and wake up the dim old river-god
from his nap.

As to Irons, if he was all that his wife gave out, he must have been a
mighty sly dog indeed; for on the whole, he presented a tolerably decent
exterior to society. It is said, indeed, that he liked a grave tumbler
of punch, and was sardonic and silent in his liquor; that his gait was
occasionally a little queer and uncertain, as his lank figure glided
home by moonlight, from the 'Salmon House;' and that his fingers fumbled
longer than need be with the latch, and his tongue, though it tried but
a short and grim 'bar'th door, Marjry,' or 'gi' me can'le, wench,'
sometimes lacked its cunning, and slipped and kept not time. There were,
too, other scandals, such as the prying and profane love to shoot
privily at church celebrities. Perhaps it was his reserve and sanctity
that provoked them. Perhaps he was, in truth, though cautious, sometimes
indiscreet. Perhaps it was fanciful Mrs. Irons' jealous hullabaloos and
hysterics that did it--I don't know--but people have been observed,
apropos of him, to wink at one another, and grin, and shake their
heads, and say: 'the nearer the church, you know'--and 'he so ancient,
too! but 'tis an old rat that won't eat cheese,' and so forth.

Just as Mrs. Irons whisked round for the seventh time to start upon her
long threatened march to Dr. Walsingham's study to lay her pitiful case
before him, Captain Devereux, who was looking toward the 'Phoenix,'
saw the truant clerk and Mr. Dangerfield turn the corner together on
their return.

'Stay, Madam, here comes the traitor,' said he; 'and, on my honour, 'tis
worse than we thought; for he has led my Lord Castlemallard's old agent
into mischief too--and Meg Partlet has had two swains at her feet this
morning; and, see, the hypocrites have got some trout in their basket,
and their rods on their shoulders--and look, for all the world, as if
they had only been fishing--sly rogues!'

'Well, it's all one,' said Mrs. Irons, gaping from the other window, and
sobering rapidly; 'if 'tisn't to-day, 'twill be to-morrow, I suppose;
and at any rate 'tis a sin and shame to leave any poor crature in this
miserable taking, not knowing but he might be drownded--or worse--dear
knows it would not be much trouble to tell his wife when the gentleman
wanted him--and sure for any honest matter I'd never say against it.'

Her thoughts were running upon Dangerfield, and what 'compliment' he had
probably made her husband at parting; and a minute or two after this,
Devereux saw her, with her riding-hood on, trudging up to the "Salmon
House" to make inquisition after the same.






Dr. Sturk's spirits and temper had not become more pleasant lately. In
fact he brooded more, and was more savage at home than was at all
agreeable. He used to go into town oftener, and to stay there later; and
his language about Toole and Nutter, when there was none but submissive
little Mrs. Sturk by, was more fierce and coarse than ever. To hear him,
then, one would have supposed that they were actually plotting to make
away with him, and that in self-defence he must smite them hip and
thigh. Then, beside their moral offensiveness, they were such 'idiots,'
and: 'noodles,' and botching and blundering right and left, so palpably
to the danger and ruin of their employers, that no man of conscience
could sit easy and see it going on; and all this simply because he had
fixed his affections upon the practice of the one, and the agency of the
other. For Sturk had, in his own belief, a genius for business of every
sort. Everybody on whom his insolent glance fell, who had any sort of
business to do, did it wrong, and was a 'precious disciple,' or a
'goose,' or a 'born jackass,' and excited his scoffing chuckle. And
little Mrs. Sturk, frightened and admiring, used to say, while he
grinned and muttered, and tittered into the fire, with his great
shoulders buried in his balloon-backed chair, his heels over the fender
and his hands in his breeches' pockets--'But, Barney, you know, you're
so clever--there's no one like you!' And he was fond of just nibbling at
speculations in a small safe way, and used to pull out a roll of
bank-notes, when he was lucky, and show his winnings to his wife, and
chuckle and swear over them, and boast and rail, and tell her, if it was
not for the cursed way his time was cut up with hospital, and field
days, and such trumpery regimental duties, he could make a fortune while
other men were thinking of it; and he very nearly believed it. And he
was, doubtless, clear-headed, though wrong-headed, too, at times, and
very energetic; but his genius was for pushing men out of their places
to make way for himself.

But with all that he had the good brute instincts too, and catered
diligently for his brood, and their 'dam'--and took a gruff
unacknowledged pride in seeing his wife well dressed--and had a strong
liking for her--and thanked her in his soul for looking after things so
well; and thought often about his boys, and looked sharply after their
education; and was an efficient and decisive head of a household; and
had no vices nor expensive indulgences; and was a hard but tolerably
just man to deal with.

All this time his uneasiness and puzzle about Dangerfield continued,
and, along with other things, kept him awake often to unseasonable hours
at night. He did not tell Mrs. Sturk. In fact, he was a man, who, though
on most occasions he gave the wife of his bosom what he called 'his
mind' freely enough, yet did not see fit to give her a great deal of his
confidence.

Dangerfield had his plans too. Who has not? Nothing could be more
compact and modest than his household. He had just a housekeeper and two
maids, who looked nearly as old, and a valet, and a groom, who slept at
the 'Phoenix,' and two very pretty horses at livery in the same place.
All his appointments were natty and complete, and his servants, every
one, stood in awe of him; for no lip or eye-service would go down with
that severe, prompt, and lynx-eyed gentleman. And his groom, among the
coachmen and other experts of the 'Salmon House,' used to brag of his
hunters in England; and his man, of his riches, and his influence with
Lord Castlemallard.

In England, Dangerfield, indeed, spent little more money than he did in
Chapelizod, except in his stable; and Lord Castlemallard, who admired
his stinginess, as he did everything else about him, used to say: 'He's
a wonder of the world! How he retains his influence over all the people
he knows without ever giving one among them so much as a mutton-chop or
a glass of sherry in his house, I can't conceive. I couldn't do it, I
know.' But he had ultimate plans, if not of splendour, at least of
luxury. His tastes, and perhaps some deeper feelings, pointed to the
continent, and he had purchased a little paradise on the Lake of Geneva,
where was an Eden of fruits and flowers, and wealth of marbles and
coloured canvas, and wonderful wines maturing in his cellars, and
aquaria for his fish, and ice-houses and baths, and I know not what
refinements of old Roman Villa-luxury beside--among which he meant to
pass the honoured evening of his days; with just a few more thousands,
and, as he sometimes thought, perhaps a wife. He had not quite made up
his mind; but he had come to the time when a man must forthwith accept
matrimony frankly, or, if he be wise, shake hands with bleak celibacy,
and content himself for his earthly future with monastic jollity and
solitude.

It is a maxim with charitable persons--and no more than a recognition of
a great constitutional axiom--to assume, in the absence of proof to the
contrary, that every British subject is an honest man. Now, if we had
gone to Lord Castlemallard for his character--and who more competent to
give him one--we know very well what we should have heard about
Dangerfield; and, on the other hand, we have never found him out--have
we, kind reader?--in a shabby action or unworthy thought; and,
therefore, it leaves upon our mind an unpleasant impression about that
Mr. Mervyn, who arrived in the dark, attending upon a coffin as
mysterious as himself, and now lives solitarily in the haunted house
near Ballyfermot, that the omniscient Dangerfield should follow him,
when they pass upon the road, with that peculiar stern glance of
surprise which seemed to say,--'Was ever such audacity conceived? Is the
man mad?'

But Dangerfield did not choose to talk about him--if indeed he had
anything to disclose--though the gentlemen at the club pressed him often
with questions, which however, he quietly parried, to the signal
vexation of active little Dr. Toole, who took up and dropped, in turn,
all sorts of curious theories about the young stranger. Lord
Castlemallard knew all about him, too, but his lordship was high and
huffy, and hardly ever in Chapelizod, except on horseback, and two or
three times in the year at a grand dinner at the Artillery mess. And
when Mervyn was mentioned he always talked of something else, rather
imperiously, as though he said, 'You'll please to observe that upon that
subject I don't choose to speak.' And as for Dr. Walsingham, when he
thought it right to hold his tongue upon a given matter, thumb-screws
could not squeeze it from him.

In short, our friend Toole grew so feverish under his disappointment
that he made an excuse of old Tim Molloy's toothache to go up in person
to the 'Tiled House,' in the hope of meeting the young gentleman, and
hearing something from him (the servants, he already knew, were as much
in the dark as he) to alleviate his distress. And, sure enough, his luck
stood him in stead; for, as he was going away, having pulled out old
Molloy's grinder to give a colour to his visit, who should he find upon
the steps of the hall-door but the pale, handsome young gentleman
himself.

Dr. Toole bowed low, and grinned with real satisfaction, reminded him of
their interview at the 'Phoenix,' and made by way of apology for his
appearance at the 'Tiled House,' a light and kind allusion to poor old
Tim, of whose toothache he spoke affectionately, and with water in his
eyes--for he half believed for the moment what he was saying--declared
how he remembered him when he did not come up to Tim's knee-buckle, and
would walk that far any day, and a bit further too, he hoped, to relieve
the poor old boy in a less matter. And finding that Mr. Mervyn was going
toward Chapelizod, he begged him not to delay on his account, and
accompanied him down the Ballyfermot road, entertaining him by the way
with an inexhaustible affluence of Chapelizod anecdote and scandal, at
which the young man stared a good deal, and sometimes even appeared
impatient: but the doctor did not perceive it, and rattled on; and told
him moreover, everything about himself and his belongings with a minute
and voluble frankness, intended to shame the suspicious reserve of the
stranger. But nothing came; and being by this time grown bolder, he
began a more direct assault, and told him, with a proper scorn of the
village curiosity, all the theories which the Chapelizod gossips had
spun about him.

'And they say, among other things, that you're not--a--in fact--there's
a mystery--a something--about your birth, you know,' said Toole, in a
tone implying pity and contempt for his idle townsfolk.

'They lie, then!' cried the young man, stopping short, more fiercely
than was pleasant, and fixing his great lurid eyes upon the cunning face
of the doctor; and, after a pause, 'Why can't they let me and my
concerns alone, Sir?'

'But there's no use in saying so, I can tell you,' exclaimed little
Toole, recovering his feet in an instant. 'Why, I suppose there isn't so
tattling, prying, lying, scandalous a little colony of Christians on
earth; eyes, ears, and mouths all open, Sir; heads busy, tongues
wagging; lots of old maids, by Jove; ladies' women, and gentlemen's
gentlemen, and drawers and footmen; club talk, Sir, and mess-table talk,
and talk on band days, talk over cards, talk at home, Sir--talk in the
streets--talk--talk; by Jupiter Tonans! 'tis enough to bother one's
ears, and make a man envy Robinson Crusoe!'

'So I do, Sir, if we were rid of his parrot,' answered Mervyn: and with
a dry 'I wish you a good-morning, doctor--doctor--a--Sir'--turned
sharply from him up the Palmerstown-road.

'Going to Belmont,' murmured little Toole, with his face a little redder
than usual, and stopping in an undignified way for a moment at the
corner to look after him. 'He's close--plaguy close; and Miss Rebecca
Chattesworth knows nothing about him neither--I wander does she
though--and doesn't seem to care even. He's not there for nothing
though. Some one makes him welcome, depend on't,' and he winked to
himself. 'A plaguy high stomach, too, by Jove. I bet you fifty, if he
stays here three months, he'll be at swords or pistols with some of our
hot bloods. And whatever his secret is--and I dare say 'tisn't worth
knowing--the people here will ferret it out at last, I warrant you.
There's small good in making all the fuss he does about it; if he knew
but all, there's no such thing as a secret here--hang the one have I,
I know, just because there's no use in trying. The whole town knows when
I've tripe for dinner, and where I have a patch or a darn. And when I
got the fourteen pigeons at Darkey's-bridge, the birds were not ten
minutes on my kitchen table when old Widow Foote sends her maid and her
compliments, as she knew my pie-dish only held a dozen, to beg the two
odd birds. Secret, indeed!' and he whistled a bar or two contemptuously,
which subsided into dejected silence, and he muttered, 'I wish I knew
it,' and walked over the bridge gloomily; and he roared more fiercely on
smaller occasions than usual at his dogs on the way home, and they
squalled oftener and louder.

Now, for some reason or other, Dangerfield had watched the growing
intimacy between Mervyn and Miss Gertrude Chattesworth with an evil eye.
He certainly did know something about this Mr. Mervyn, with his
beautiful sketches, and his talk about Italy, and his fine music. And
his own spectacles had carefully surveyed Miss Chattesworth, and she had
passed the ordeal satisfactorily. And Dangerfield thought, 'These people
can't possibly suspect the actual state of the case, and who and what
this gentleman is to my certain knowledge; and 'tis a pity so fine a
young lady should be sacrificed for want of a word spoken in season.'
And when he had decided upon a point, it was not easy to make him stop
or swerve.





 MERVYN FARED AT BELMONT, AND OF A PLEASANT LITTLE
DEJEUNER BY THE MARGIN OF THE LIFFEY.


Now it happened that on the very same day, the fashion of Dr.
Walsingham's and of Aunt Rebecca's countenances were one and both
changed towards Mr. Mervyn, much to his chagrin and puzzle. The doctor,
who met him near his own house on the bridge, was something distant in
manner, and looked him in the face with very grave eyes, and seemed sad,
and as if he had something on his mind, and laid his hand upon the young
man's arm, and addressed himself to speak; but glancing round his
shoulder, and seeing people astir, and that they were under observation,
he reserved himself.

That both the ladies of Belmont looked as if they had heard some strange
story, each in her own way. Aunt Rebecca received the young man without
a smile, and was unaccountably upon her high horse, and said some dry
and sharp things, and looked as if she could say more, and coloured
menacingly, and, in short, was odd, and very nearly impertinent. And
Gertrude, though very gentle and kind, seemed also much graver, and
looked pale, and her eyes larger and more excited, and altogether like a
brave young lady who had fought a battle without crying. And Mervyn saw
all this and pondered on it, and went away soon; the iron entered into
his soul.

Aunt Rebecca was so occupied with her dogs, squirrels, parrots, old
women, and convicts, that her eyes being off the cards, she saw little
of the game; and when a friendly whisper turned her thoughts that way,
and it flashed upon her that tricks and honours were pretty far gone,
she never remembered that she had herself to blame for the matter, but
turned upon her poor niece with 'Sly creature!' and so forth. And while
owing to this inattention, Gertrude had lost the benefit of her sage
Aunt Rebecca's counsels altogether, her venerable but frisky old
grandmother--Madam Nature--it was to be feared, might have profited by
the occasion to giggle and whistle her own advice in her ear, and been
indifferently well obeyed. I really don't pretend to say--maybe there
was nothing, or next to nothing in it; or if there was, Miss Gertrude
herself might not quite know. And if she did suspect she liked him, ever
so little, she had no one but Lilias Walsingham to tell; and I don't
know that young ladies are always quite candid upon these points. Some,
at least, I believe, don't make confidences until their secrets become
insupportable. However, Aunt Rebecca was now wide awake, and had
trumpeted a pretty shrill reveiller. And Gertrude had started up, her
elbow on the pillow, and her large eyes open; and the dream, I suppose,
was shivered and flown, and something rather ghastly at her side.

Coming out of church, Dr. Walsingham asked Mervyn to take a turn with
him in the park--and so they did--and the doctor talked with him
seriously and kindly on that broad plateau. The young man walked darkly
beside him, and they often stopped outright. When, on their return, they
came near the Chapelizod gate, and Parson's lodge, and the duck-pond,
the doctor was telling him that marriage is an affair of the heart--also
a spiritual union--and, moreover, a mercantile partnership--and he
insisted much upon this latter view--and told him what and how strict
was the practice of the ancient Jews, the people of God, upon this
particular point. Dr. Walsingham had made a love-match, was the most
imprudent and open-handed of men, and always preaching to others against
his own besetting sin. To hear him talk, indeed, you would have supposed
he was a usurer. Then Mr. Mervyn, who looked a little pale and excited,
turned the doctor about, and they made another little circuit, while he
entered somewhat into his affairs and prospects, and told him something
about an appointment in connexion with the Embassy at Paris, and said he
would ask him to read some letters about it; and the doctor seemed a
little shaken; and so they parted in a very friendly but grave way.

When Mervyn had turned his back upon Belmont, on the occasion of the
unpleasant little visit I mentioned just now, the ladies had some words
in the drawing-room.

'I have not coquetted, Madam,' said Miss Gertrude, haughtily.

'Then I'm to presume you've been serious; and I take the liberty to ask
how far this affair has proceeded?' said Aunt Rebecca, firmly, and
laying her gloved hand and folded fan calmly on the table.

'I really forget,' said the young lady, coldly.

'Has he made a declaration of love?' demanded the aunt, the two red
spots on her cheeks coming out steadily, and helping the flash of her
eyes.

'Certainly not,' answered the young lady, with a stare of haughty
surprise that was quite unaffected.

At the pleasant luncheon and dance on the grass that the officers gave,
in that pretty field by the river, half-a-dozen of the young people had
got beside the little brook that runs simpering and romping into the
river just there. Women are often good-natured in love matters where
rivalry does not mix, and Miss Gertrude, all on a sudden, found herself
alone with Mervyn. Aunt Becky, from under the ash trees at the other end
of the field, with great distinctness, for she was not a bit
near-sighted, and considerable uneasiness, saw their tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte. It
was out of the question getting up in time to prevent the young people
speaking their minds if so disposed, and she thought she perceived that
in the young man's bearing, which looked like a pleading and eagerness,
and 'Gertrude's put out a good deal--I see by her plucking at those
flowers--but my head to a China orange--the girl won't think of him.
She's not a young woman to rush into a horrible folly, hand-over-head,'
thought Aunt Becky; and then she began to think they were talking very
much at length indeed, and to regret that she had not started at once
from her post for the place of meeting; and one, and two, and three
minutes passed, and perhaps some more, and Aunt Becky began to grow
wroth, and was on the point of marching upon them, when they began
slowly to walk towards the group who were plucking bunches of woodbine
from the hedge across the little stream, at the risk of tumbling in, and
distributing the flowers among the ladies, amidst a great deal of
laughing and gabble. Then Miss Gertrude made Mr. Mervyn rather a haughty
and slight salutation, her aunt thought, and so dismissed him; he, too,
made a bow, but a very low one, and walked straight off to the first
lady he saw.

This happened to be mild little Mrs. Sturk, and he talked a good deal to
her, but restlessly, and, as it seemed, with a wandering mind; and
afterwards he conversed, with an affectation of interest--it was only
that--Aunt Becky, who observed him with some curiosity, thought--for a
few minutes with Lilias Walsingham; and afterwards he talked with an
effort, and so much animation and such good acceptance [though it was
plain, Aunt Becky said, that he did not listen to one word she said,] to
the fair Magnolia, that O'Flaherty had serious thoughts of
horse-whipping him when the festivities were over--for, as he purposed
informing him, his 'ungentlemanlike intherfarence.'

'He has got his quietus,' thought Aunt Becky, with triumph; 'this brisk,
laughing carriage, and heightened colour, a woman of experience can see
through at a glance.'

Yes, all this frisking and skipping is but the hypocrisy of bleeding
vanity--hÃ¦ret lateri--they are just the flush, wriggle, and hysterics
of suppressed torture.

Then came her niece, cold and stately, with steady eye and a slight
flush, and altogether the air of the conscientious young matron who has
returned from the nursery, having there administered the discipline; and
so she sat down beside her aunt, serene and silent, and, the little glow
passed away, pale and still.

'Well, he has spoken?' said her aunt to her, in a sharp aside.

'Yes,' answered the young lady, icily.

'And has had his answer?'

'Yes--and I beg, Aunt Rebecca, the subject may be allowed to drop.' The
young lady's eyes encountered her aunt's so directly and were so fully
charged with the genuine Chattesworth lightning, that Miss Rebecca,
unused to such demonstrations, averted hers, and with a slight sarcastic
inclination, and, 'Oh! your servant, young lady,' beckoning with her fan
grandly to little Puddock, who was hovering with other designs in the
vicinity, and taking his arm, though he was not forgiven, but only
employed--a distinction often made by good Queen Elizabeth--marched to
the marquee, where, it was soon evident, the plump lieutenant was busy
in commending, according to their merits, the best bits of the best
plats on the table.

'So dear Aunt Becky has forgiven Puddock,' said Devereux, who was
sauntering up to the tent between O'Flaherty and Cluffe, and little
suspecting that he was descanting upon the intended Mrs. Cluffe--'and
they are celebrating the reconciliation over a jelly and a pupton. I
love Aunt Rebecca, I tell you--I don't know what we should do without
her. She's impertinent, and often nearly insupportable; but isn't she
the most placable creature on earth? I venture to say I might kill you,
Lieutenant O'Flaherty--of course, with your permission, Sir--and she'd
forgive me to-morrow morning! And she really does princely
things--doesn't she? She set up that ugly widow--what's her name?--twice
in a shop in Dame Street, and gave two hundred pounds to poor Scamper's
orphan, and actually pensions that old miscreant, Wagget, who ought to
be hanged--and never looks for thanks or compliments, or upbraids her
ingrates with past kindnesses. She's noble--Aunt Becky's every inch a
gentleman!'

By this time they had reached the tent, and the hearty voice of the
general challenged them from the shade, as he filliped a little chime
merrily on his empty glass.










 IRONS RECOUNTS SOME OLD RECOLLECTIONS ABOUT THE PIED HORSE
AND THE FLOWER DE LUCE.


It was so well known in Chapelizod that Sturk was poking after Lord
Castlemallard's agency that Nutter felt the scene going on before his
eyes between him and Dangerfield like a public affront. His ire was that
of a phlegmatic man, dangerous when stirred, and there was no mistaking,
in his rigid, swarthy countenance, the state of his temper.

Dangerfield took an opportunity, and touched Nutter on the shoulder, and
told him frankly, in effect, though he wished things to go on as
heretofore, Sturk had wormed himself into a sort of confidence with Lord
Castlemallard.

'Not confidence, Sir--talk, if you please,' said Nutter grimly.

'Well, into talk,' acquiesced Dangerfield; 'and by Jove, I've a hard
card to play, you see. His lordship will have me listen to Doctor
Sturk's talk, such as it is.'

'He has no talk in him, Sir, you mayn't get from any other impudent
dunderhead in the town,' answered Nutter.

'My dear Sir, understand me. I'm your friend,' and he placed his hand
amicably upon Nutter's arm; 'but Lord Castlemallard has, now and then, a
will of his own, I need not tell you; and somebody's been doing you an
ill turn with his lordship; and you're a gentleman, Mr. Nutter, and I
like you, and I'll be frank with you, knowing 'twill go no further.
Sturk wants the agency. You have my good-will. I don't see why he
should take it from you; but--but--you see his lordship takes odd
likings, and he won't always listen to reason.'

Nutter was so shocked and exasperated, that for a moment he felt
stunned, and put his hand toward his head.

'I think, Sir,' said Nutter, with a stern, deliberate oath, I'll write
to Lord Castlemallard this evening, and throw up his agency; and
challenge Sturk, and fight him in the morning.'

'You must not resign the agency, Sir; his lordship is whimsical; but you
have a friend at court. I've spoken in full confidence in your secrecy;
and should any words pass between you and Dr. Sturk, you'll not mention
my name; I rely, Sir, on your honour, as you may on my good-will;' and
Dangerfield shook hands with Nutter significantly, and called to Irons,
who was waiting to accompany him, and the two anglers walked away
together up the river.

Nutter was still possessed with his furious resolution to fling down his
office at Lord Castlemallard's feet, and to call Sturk into the lists of
mortal combat. One turn by himself as far as the turnpike, however, and
he gave up the first, and retained only the second resolve. Half-an-hour
more, and he had settled in his mind that there was no need to punish
the meddler that way: and so he resolved to bide his time--a short one.

In the meanwhile Dangerfield had reached one of those sweet pastures by
the river's bank which, as we have read, delight the simple mind of the
angler, and his float was already out, and bobbing up and down on the
ripples of the stream; and the verdant valley, in which he and his
taciturn companion stood side by side, resounded, from time to time,
with Dangerfield's strange harsh laughter; the cause of which Irons did
not, of course, presume to ask.

There is a church-yard cough--I don't see why there may not be a
church-yard laugh. In Dangerfield's certainly there was an omen--a glee
that had nothing to do with mirth; and more dismaying, perhaps, than his
sternest rebuke. If a man is not a laugher by nature, he had better let
it alone. The bipeds that love mousing and carrion have a chant of their
own, and nobody quarrels with it. We respect an owl or a raven, though
we mayn't love him, while he sticks to his croak or to-whoo. 'Tisn't
pleasant, but quite natural and unaffected, and we acquiesce. All we ask
of these gentlemanlike birds is, that they mistake not their
talent--affect not music; or if they do, that they treat not us to their
queer warblings.

Irons, with that never-failing phantom of a smile on his thin lips,
stood a little apart, with a gaff and landing-net, and a second rod, and
a little bag of worms, and his other gear, silent, except when spoken
to, or sometimes to suggest a change of bait, or fly, or a cast over a
particular spot; for Dangerfield was of good Colonel Venables' mind,
that 'tis well in the lover of the gentle craft to associate himself
with some honest, expert angler, who will freely and candidly
communicate his skill unto him.'

Dangerfield was looking straight at his float; but thinking of something
else. Whenever Sturk met him at dinner, or the club, the doctor's
arrogance and loud lungs failed him, and he fell for a while into a sort
of gloom and dreaming; and when he came slowly to himself, he could not
talk to anyone but the man with the spectacles; and in the midst of his
talk he would grow wandering and thoughtful, as if over some
half-remembered dream; and when he took his leave of Dangerfield it was
with a lingering look and a stern withdrawal, as if he had still a last
word to say, and he went away in a dismal reverie. It was natural, that
with his views about the agency, Sturk should regard him with
particular interest. But there was something more here, and it did not
escape Dangerfield, as, indeed, very little that in anywise concerned
him ever did.

'Clever fellow, Doctor Sturk,' said the silver spectacles, looking
grimly at the float. 'I like him. You remember him, you say, Irons?'

'Ay, Sir,' said Blue-chin: 'I never forget a face.' 'Par nobile,'
sneered the angler quietly.' In the year '45, eh--go on.'

'Ay, Sir; he slept in the "Pied Horse," at Newmarket, and was in all the
fun. Next day he broke his arm badly, and slept there in the closet off
Mr. Beauclerc's room that night under laudanum, and remained ten days
longer in the house. Mr. Beauclerc's chamber was the "flower de luce."
Barnabus Sturk, Esq. When I saw him here, half the length of the street
away, I knew him and his name on the instant. I never forget things.'

'But he don't remember you?'

'No,' smiled Blue-chin, looking at the float also.

'Two-and-twenty-years. How came it he was not summoned?'

'He was under laudanum, and could tell nothing.'

'Ay,' said the spectacles, 'ay,' and he let out some more line. 'That's
deep.'

'Yes, Sir, a soldier was drownded in that hole.'

'And Dr. Toole and Mr. Nutter don't love him--both brisk fellows, and
have fought.'

Blue-chin smiled on.

'Very clever dog--needs be sharp though, or he'll come to--ha!' and a
gray trout came splashing and flickering along the top of the water upon
the hook, and Irons placed the net in Dangerfield's outstretched hand,
and the troutling was landed, to the distant music of 'God save the
King,' borne faintly on the air, by which the reader perceives that the
band were now about to put up their instruments, and the gay folk to
disperse. And at the same moment, Lord Castlemallard was doing old
General Chattesworth the honour to lean upon his arm, as they walked to
and fro upon the parade-ground by the river's bank, and the general
looked particularly grand and thoughtful, and my lord was more than
usually gracious and impressive, and was saying:--

''Tis a good match every way: he has good blood in his veins, Sir, the
Dangerfields of Redminster; and you may suppose he's rich, when he was
ready to advance Sir Sedley Hicks thirty-five thousand pounds on
mortgage, and to my certain knowledge has nearly as much more out on
good securities; and he's the most principled man I think I ever met
with, and the cleverest dog, I believe, in these kingdoms; and I wish
you joy, General Chattesworth.'

And he gave the general snuff out of his box, and shook hands, and said
something very good, as he got into his carriage, for he laughed a good
deal, and touched the general's ribs with the point of his gloved
finger; and the general laughed too, moderately, and was instantaneously
grave again, when the carriage whirled away.





 MACNAMARA WAS TROUBLED AND HAUNTED TOO, AND
OPENING A BUDGET OF GOSSIP.


Some score pages back, when we were all assembled at the King's House,
my reader, perhaps, may not have missed our fat and consequential, but
on the whole, good-natured acquaintance, Mrs. Macnamara; though, now I
remember, he did overhear the gentle Magnolia, in that little colloquy
in which she and Aunt Becky exchanged compliments, say, in substance,
that she hoped that amiable parent might be better next day. She was not
there, she was not well. Of late Mrs. Macnamara had lost all her pluck,
and half her colour, and some even of her fat. She was like one of those
portly dowagers in Numbernip's select society of metamorphosed turnips,
who suddenly exhibited sympathetic symptoms of failure, grew yellow,
flabby, and wrinkled, as the parent bulb withered and went out of
season. You would not have known her for the same woman.

A tall, pale female, dressed in black satin and a black velvet riding
hood, had made her two visits in a hackney-coach; but whether these had
any connexion with the melancholy change referred to, I don't, at this
moment, say. I know that they had a very serious bearing upon after
events affecting persons who figure in this true history. Whatever her
grief was she could not bring herself to tell it. And so her damask
cheek, and portly form, and rollicking animal spirits continued to
suffer.

The major found that her mind wandered at piquet. Toole also caught her
thinking of something else in the midst of his best bits of local
scandal; and Magnolia several times popped in upon her large mother in
tears. Once or twice Toole thought, and he was right, that she was on
the point of making a disclosure. But her heart failed her, and it came
to nothing. The little fellow's curiosity was on fire. In his philosophy
there was more in everything than met the eye, and he would not believe
Magnolia, who laughed at him, that she did not know all about it.

On this present morning poor Mrs. Macnamara had received a note, at
which she grew pale as the large pat of butter before her, and she felt
quite sick as she thrust the paper into her pocket, and tried to smile
across the breakfast table at Magnolia, who was rattling away as usual,
and the old major who was chuckling at her impudent mischief over his
buttered toast and tea.

'Why, mother dear,' cried Mag suddenly, 'what the plague ails your
pretty face? Did you ever see the like? It's for all the world like a
bad batter pudding! I lay a crown, now, that was a bill. Was it a bill?
Come now, Mullikins (a term of endearment for mother). Show us the note.
It is too bad, you poor dear, old, handsome, bothered angel, you should
be fretted and tormented out of your looks and your health, by them
dirty shopkeepers' bills, when a five-pound note, I'm certain sure, 'id
pay every mothers skin o' them, and change to spare!' And the elegant
Magnolia, whose soiclainet and Norwich crape petticoat were unpaid for,
darted a glance of reproach full upon the major's powdered head, the top
of which was cleverly presented to receive it, as he swallowed in haste
his cup of tea, and rising suddenly, for his purse had lately suffered
in the service of the ladies, and wanted rest--

'Tis nothing at all but that confounded egg,' he said, raising that
untasted delicacy a little towards his nose. 'Why the divil will you go
on buying our eggs from that dirty old sinner, Poll Delany?' And he
dropped it from its cup plump into the slop-basin.

'A then maybe it was,' said poor Mrs. Mac, smiling as well as she could;
'but I'm better.'

'No you're not, Mullikins,' interposed Magnolia impatiently. 'There's
Toole crossing the street, will I call him up?'

'Not for the world, Maggy darling. I'd have to pay him, and where's the
money to come from?'

The major did not hear, and was coughing besides; and recollecting that
he had a word for the adjutant's ear, took his sword off the peg where
it hung, and his cocked hat, and vanished in a twinkling.

'Pay Toole, indeed! nonsense, mother,' and up went the window.

'Good-morrow to your nightcap, doctor!'

'And the top of the morning to you, my pretty Miss chattering Mag, up on
your perch there,' responded the physician.

'And what in the world brings you out this way at breakfast time, and
where are you going?--Oh! goosey, goosey gander, where do you wander?'

'Up stairs, if you let me,' said Toole, with a flourish of his hand, and
a gallant grin, 'and to my lady's chamber.'

'And did you hear the news?' demanded Miss Mag.

The doctor glanced over his shoulder, and seeing the coast clear, he was
by this time close under the little scarlet geranium pots that stood on
the window-sill.

'Miss Chattesworth, eh?' he asked, in a sly, low tone.

'Oh, bother her, no. Do you remember Miss Anne Marjoribanks, that lodged
in Doyle's house, down there, near the mills, last summer, with her
mother, the fat woman with the poodle, and the--don't you know?'

'Ay, ay; she wore a flowered silk tabby sacque, on band days,' said
Toole, who had an eye and a corner in his memory for female costume, 'a
fine showy--I remember.' 'Well, middling: that's she.'

'And what of her?' asked Toole, screwing himself up as close as he could
to the flower-pots.

'Come up and I'll tell you,' and she shut down the window and beckoned
him slily, and up came Toole all alive.

Miss Magnolia told her story in her usual animated way, sometimes
dropping her voice to a whisper, and taking Toole by the collar,
sometimes rising to a rollicking roar of laughter, while the little
doctor stood by, his hands in his breeches' pockets, making a pleasant
jingle with his loose change there, with open mouth and staring eyes,
and a sort of breathless grin all over his ruddy face. Then came another
story, and more chuckling.

'And what about that lanky long may-pole, Gerty Chattesworth, the
witch?--not that anyone cares tuppence if she rode on a broom to sweep
the cobwebs off the moon, only a body may as well know, you know,' said
Miss Mag, preparing to listen.

'Why, by Jupiter! they say--but d'ye mind, I don't know, and faith I
don't believe it--but they do say she's going to be married to--who do
you think now?' answered Toole.

'Old Colonel Bligh, of the Magazine, or Dr. Walsingham, may be,' cried
Mag, with a burst of laughter; 'no young fellow would be plagued with
her, I'm certain.'

'Well, ha, ha! you are a conjuror, Miss Mag, to be sure. He's not
young--you're right there--but then, he's rich, he is, by Jove! there's
no end of his--well, what do you say now to Mr. Dangerfield?'

'Dangerfield! Well' (after a little pause), 'he's ugly enough and old
enough too, for the matter of that; but he's as rich as a pork-pie; and
if he's worth half what they say, you may take my word for it, when he
goes to church it won't be to marry the steeple.'

And she laughed again scornfully and added--

''Twas plain enough from the first, the whole family laid themselves out
to catch the old quiz and his money. Let the Chattesworths alone for
scheming, with all their grand airs. Much I mind them! Why, the old
sinner was not an hour in the town when he was asked over the way to
Belmont, and Miss dressed out there like a puppet, to simper and flatter
the rich old land agent, and butter him up--my Lord Castlemallard's
bailiff--if you please, ha, ha, ha! and the Duchess of Belmont, that
ballyrags every one round her, like a tipsy old soldier, as civil as
six, my dear Sir, with her "Oh, Mr. Dangerfield, this," and her "Dear
Mr. Dangerfield, that," and all to marry that long, sly hussy to a
creature old enough to be her grandfather, though she's no chicken
neither. Faugh! filthy!' and Miss Magnolia went through an elegant
pantomime of spitting over her shoulder into the grate.

Toole thought there was but one old fellow of his acquaintance who might
be creditably married by a girl young enough to be his granddaughter,
and that was honest Arthur Slowe; and he was going to insinuate a joke
of the sort; but perceiving that his sly preparatory glance was not
pleasantly responded to, and that the stalworth nymph was quite in
earnest, he went off to another topic.

The fact is that Toole knew something of Miss Mag's plans, as he did of
most of the neighbours' beside. Old Slowe was, in certain preponderating
respects, much to be preferred to the stalworth fireworker, Mr.
Lieutenant O'Flaherty. And the two gentlemen were upon her list. Two
strings to a bow is a time-honoured provision. Cupid often goes so
furnished. If the first snap at the critical moment, should we
bow-string our precious throttles with the pieces? Far be it from us!
Let us waste no time in looking foolish; but pick up the gray-goose
shaft that lies so innocently at our feet among the daisies; and it's
odds but the second plants it i' the clout.' The lover, the hero of the
piece, upon whose requited passion and splendid settlements the curtain
goes down, is a role not always safely to be confided to the genius
and discretion of a single performer. Take it that the captivating
Frederick Belville, who is announced for the part, is, along with his
other qualifications, his gallantry, his grace, his ringlets, his
pathetic smile, his lustrous eyes, his plaintive tenor, and
five-and-twenty years--a little bit of a rip--rather frail in the
particular of brandy and water, and so, not quite reliable. Will not the
prudent manager provide a substitute respectably to fill the part, in
the sad event of one of those sudden indispositions to which Belville is
but too liable! It may be somewhat 'fat and scant of breath,' ay, and
scant of hair and of teeth too. But though he has played Romeo thirty
years ago, the perruquier, and the dentist, and the rouge-pot, and the
friendly glare of the foot-lights will do wonders; and Podgers--steady
fellow!--will be always at the right wing, at the right moment, know
every line of his author, and contrive to give a very reasonable amount
of satisfaction to all parties concerned. Following this precedent,
then, that wise virgin, Miss Magnolia, and her sagacious mamma, had
allotted the role in question to Arthur Slowe, who was the better
furnished for the part, and, on the whole, the stronger 'cast.' But
failing him, Lieutenant O'Flaherty was quietly, but unconsciously, as
the phrase is,'under-studying' that somewhat uncertain gentleman.

'And the general's off to Scarborough,' said Toole.

'Old Chattesworth! I thought it was to Bath.

'Oh, no, Scarborough; a touch of the old rheum, and stomach I sent him
there; and he's away in the Hillsborough packet for Holyhead this
morning, and Colonel Stafford's left in command.'

'And my Lady Becky Belmont's superseded,' laughed Miss Magnolia,
derisively.

'And who do you think's going to make the grand tour? from Paris to
Naples, if you please, and from Naples to Rome, and up to Venice, and
home through Germany, and deuce knows where beside; you'll not guess in
a twel'month,' said Toole, watching her with a chuckle.

'Devereux, maybe,' guessed the young lady.

'No 'tisn't,' said Toole, delighted; 'try again!'

'Well, 'tis, let me see. Some wild young rogue, with a plenty of money,
I warrant, if I could only think of him--come, don't keep me all
day--who the plague is he, Toole?' urged the young lady, testily.

'Dan Loftus,' answered Toole, 'ha, ha, ha, ha!'

'Dan Loftus!--the grand tour--why, where's the world running to? Oh, ho,
ho, ho, hoo! what a macaroni!' and they laughed heartily over it, and
called him 'travelled monkey,' and I know not what else.

'Why, I thought Dr. Walsingham designed him for his curate; but what in
the wide world brings Dan Loftus to foreign parts--"To dance and sing
for the Spanish King, and to sing and dance for the Queen of France?"'

'Hey! Dan's got a good place, I can tell you--travelling tutor to the
hopeful young lord that is to be--Devereux's cousin. By all the Graces,
Ma'am, 'tis the blind leading the blind. I don't know which of the two
is craziest. Hey, diddle-diddle--by Jupiter, such a pair--the dish ran
away with the spoon; but Dan's a good creature, and we'll--we'll miss
him. I like Dan, and he loves the rector--I like him for that; where
there's gratitude and fidelity, Miss Mag, there's no lack of other
virtues, I warrant you--and the good doctor has been a wonderful loving
friend to poor Dan, and God bless him for it, say I, and amen.'

'And amen with all my heart,' said Miss Mag, gaily; ''tis an innocent
creature--poor Dan; though he'd be none the worse of a little more lace
to his hat, and a little less Latin in his head. But see here, doctor,
here's my poor old goose of a mother (and she kissed her cheek) as sick
as a cat in a tub.'

And she whispered something in Toole's wig, and they both laughed
uproariously.

'I would not take five guineas and tell you what she says,' cried Toole.

'Don't mind the old blackguard, mother dear!' screamed Magnolia, dealing
Ãsculapius a lusty slap on the back; and the cook at that moment
knocking at the door, called off the young lady to the larder, who
cried over her shoulder as she lingered a moment at the door--'Now, send
her something, Toole, for my sake, to do her poor heart good. Do you
mind--for faith and troth the dear old soul is sick and sad; and I won't
let that brute, Sturk, though he does wear our uniform, next or near
her.'

'Well, 'tisn't for me to say, eh?--and now she's gone,--just let me
try.' And he took her pulse.








And Toole, holding her stout wrist, felt her pulse and said--'Hem--I
see--and--'

And so he ran on with half-a-dozen questions, and at the end of his
catechism said, bluntly enough--

'I tell you what it is, Mrs. Mack, you have something on your mind, my
dear Madam, and till it's off, you'll never be better.'

Poor Mrs. Mack opened her eyes, and made a gesture of amazed disclaimer,
with her hands palm upwards. It was all affectation.

'Pish!' said Toole, who saw the secret almost in his grasp; 'don't tell
me, my dear Madam--don't you think I know my business by this time o'
day? I tell you again you'd better ease your mind--or take my word for
it you'll be sorry too late. How would you like to go off like poor old
Peggy Slowe--eh? There's more paralysis, apoplexy, heart-diseases, and
lunacy, caused in one year by that sort of silly secrecy and moping,
than by--hang it! My dear Madam,' urged Toole, breaking into a bold
exhortation on seeing signs of confusion and yielding in his fat
patient--'you'd tell me all that concerns your health, and know that Tom
Toole would put his hand in the fire before he'd let a living soul hear
a symptom of your case; and here's some paltry little folly or trouble
that I would not--as I'm a gentleman--give a half-penny to hear, and
you're afraid to tell me--though until you do, neither I, nor all the
doctors in Europe, can do you a ha'porth o' good.'

'Sure I've nothing to tell, doctor dear,' whimpered poor Mrs. Mack,
dissolving into her handkerchief.

'Look ye--there's no use in trying to deceive a doctor that knows what
he's about.' Toole was by this time half mad with curiosity. 'Don't tell
me what's on your mind, though I'd be sorry you thought I wasn't ready
and anxious, to help you with my best and most secret services; but I
confess, my dear Ma'am, I'd rather not hear--reserve it for some friend
who has your confidence--but 'tis plain from the condition you're
in'--and Toole closed his lips hard, and nodded twice or thrice--'you
have not told either the major or your daughter; and tell it you must to
some one, or take the consequences.'

'Oh! Dr. Toole, I am in trouble--and I'd like to tell you; but won't
you--won't you promise me now, on your solemn honour, if I do, you won't
tell a human being?' blubbered the poor matron.

'Conscience, honour, veracity, Ma'am--but why should I say any
more--don't you know me, my dear Mrs. Mack?' said Toole in a hot fidget,
and with all the persuasion of which he was master.

'Indeed, I do--and I'm in great trouble--and sometimes think no one can
take me out of it,' pursued she.

'Come, come, my dear Madam, is it money?' demanded Toole.

'Oh! no--it's--'tis a dreadful--that is, there is money in it--but oh!
dear Doctor Toole, there's a frightful woman, and I don't know what to
do: and I sometimes thought you might be able to help me--you're so
clever--and I was going to tell you, but I was ashamed--there now, it's
out,' and she blubbered aloud.

'What's out?' said Toole, irritated. 'I can't stop here all day, you
know; and if you'd rather I'd go, say so.'

'Oh no, but the major, nor Maggy does not know a word about it; and so,
for your life, don't tell them; and--and--here it is.'

And from her pocket she produced a number of the Freeman's Journal,
five or six weeks old and a great deal soiled.

'Read it, read it, doctor dear, and you'll see.'

'Read all this! thank you, Ma'am; I read it a month ago,' said the
doctor gruffly.

'Oh! no--this--only there--you see--here,' and she indicated a
particular advertisement, which we here reprint for the reader's
instruction; and thus it ran--

     "MARY MATCHWELL'S most humble Respects attend the Nobility
     and Gentry. She has the Honour to acquaint them that she transacts
     all Business relative to Courtship and Marriage, with the utmost
     Dispatch and Punctuality. She has, at a considerable Expense,
     procured a complete List of all the unmarried Persons of both Sexes
     in this Kingdom, with an exact Account of their Characters,
     Fortunes, Ages, and Persons. Any Lady or Gentleman, by sending a
     Description of the Husband or Wife they would chuse, shall be
     informed where such a One is to be had, and put in a Method for
     obtaining him, or her, in the speediest Manner, and at the smallest
     Expense. Mrs. Matchwell's Charges being always proportioned to the
     Fortunes of the Parties, and not to be paid till the Marriage takes
     place. She hopes the Honour and Secrecy she will observe in her
     Dealings, will encourage an unfortunate Woman, who hath experienced
     the greatest Vicissitudes of Life, as will be seen in her Memoirs,
     which are shortly to be published under the Title of 'Fortune's
     Football.' All Letters directed to M. M., and sent Post paid to the
     Office where this Paper is published, shall be answered with
     Care."'

'Yes, yes, I remember that--a cheating gipsy--why, it's going on
still--I saw it again yesterday, I think--a lying jade!--and this is the
rogue that troubles you?' said Toole with his finger on the paragraph,
as the paper lay on the table.

'Give it to me, doctor, dear. I would not have them see it for the
world--and--and--oh! doctor--sure you wouldn't tell.'

'Augh, bother!--didn't I swear my soul, Ma'am; and do you think I'm
going to commit a perjury about "Mary Matchwell"--phiat!'

Well, with much ado, and a great circumbendibus, and floods of tears,
and all sorts of deprecations and confusions, out came the murder at
last.

Poor Mrs. Mack had a duty to perform by her daughter. Her brother was
the best man in the world; but what with 'them shockin' forfitures' in
her father's time (a Jacobite granduncle had forfeited a couple of
town-lands, value Â£37 per annum, in King William's time, and to that
event, in general terms, she loved to refer the ruin of her family), and
some youthful extravagances, his income, joined to hers, could not keep
the dear child in that fashion and appearance her mother had enjoyed
before her, and people without pedigree or solid pretension of any sort,
looked down upon her, just because they had money (she meant the
Chattesworths), and denied her the position which was hers of right, and
so seeing no other way of doing the poor child justice, she applied to
'M. M.'

'To find a husband for Mag, eh?' said Toole.

'No, no. Oh, Dr. Toole, 'twas--'twas for me,' sobbed poor Mrs. Mack.
Toole stared for a moment, and had to turn quickly about, and admire
some shell-work in a glass box over the chimneypiece very closely, and I
think his stout short back was shaking tremulously as he did so; and,
when he turned round again, though his face was extraordinarily grave,
it was a good deal redder than usual.

'Well, my dear Madam, and where's the great harm in that, when all's
done?' said Toole.

'Oh, doctor, I had the unpardonable wakeness, whatever come over me,
to write her two letters on the subject, and she'll print them, and
expose me, unless,'--here she rolled herself about in an agony of tears,
and buried her fat face in the back of the chair.

'Unless you give her money, I suppose,' said Toole. 'There's what
invariably comes of confidential communications with female enchanters
and gipsies! And what do you propose to do?'

'I don't know--what can I do? She got the Â£5 I borrowed from my brother,
and he can't lend me more; and I can't tell him what I done with that;
and she has Â£3 10s. I--I raised on my best fan, and the elegant
soiclainet, you know--I bought it of Knox & Acheson, at the Indian
Queen, in Dame-street;' and his poor patient turned up her small tearful
blue eyes imploringly to his face, and her good-natured old features
were quivering all over with tribulation.

'And Mag knows nothing of all this?' said Toole.

'Oh, not for the wide world,' whispered the matron, in great alarm.
'Whisht! is that her coming?'

'No; there she is across the street talking to Mrs. Nutter. Listen to
me: I'll manage that lady, Mrs. Mary--what's her name?--Matchwell. I'll
take her in hands, and--whisper now.'

So Toole entered into details, and completed an officious little
conspiracy; and the upshot of it was that Mrs. Mack, whenever M. M. fixed
a day for her next extortionate visit, was to apprise the doctor, who
was to keep in the way; and, when she arrived, the good lady was just to
send across to him for some 'peppermint drops,' upon which hint Toole
himself would come slily over, and place himself behind the arras in the
bed-room, whither, for greater seclusion and secrecy, she was to conduct
the redoubted Mary Matchwell, who was thus to be overheard, and taken by
the clever doctor in the act; and then and there frightened not only
into a surrender of the documents, but of the money she had already
extracted, and compelled to sign such a confession of her guilt as would
effectually turn the tables, and place her at the mercy of the once more
happy Macnamara.

The doctor was so confident, and the scheme, to the sanguine Celtic
imagination of the worthy matron, appeared so facile of execution and
infallible of success, that I believe she would at that moment have
embraced, and even kissed, little Toole, in the exuberance of her
gratitude, had that learned physician cared for such fooleries.

The fact is, however, that neither the doctor nor his patient quite
understood Mrs. Matchwell or her powers, nor had the least inkling of
the marvellous designs that were ripening in her brain, and involving
the fate of more than one of the good easy people of Chapelizod, against
whom nobody dreamed a thunderbolt was forging.

So the doctor, being a discreet man, only shook her cordially by the
hand, at his departure, patting her encouragingly at the same time, on
her fat shoulder, and with a sly grin and a wink, and a wag of his
head--offering to 'lay fifty,' that between them 'they'd be too hard for
the witch.'















So there was no feud in the club worth speaking of but those of which
Dr. Sturk was the centre; and Toole remarked this night that Sturk
looked very ill--and so, in truth, he did; and it was plain, too, that
his mind was not in the game, for old Slowe, who used not to have a
chance with him, beat him three times running, which incensed Sturk, as
small things will a man who is in the slow fever of a secret trouble. He
threw down the three shillings he had lost with more force than was
necessary, and muttering a curse, clapped on his hat and took up a
newspaper at another table, with a rather flushed face. He happened to
light upon a dolorous appeal to those 'whom Providence had blessed with
riches,' on behalf of a gentleman 'who had once held a commission under
his Majesty, and was now on a sudden by some unexpected turns of
fortune, reduced, with his unhappy wife and five small children, to want
of bread, and implored of his prosperous fellow-citizens that charitable
relief which, till a few months since, it was his custom and pleasure to
dispense to others.' And this stung him with a secret pang of insecurity
and horror. Trifles affected him a good deal now. So he pitched down the
newspaper and walked across to his own house, with his hands in his
pockets, and thought again of Dangerfield, and who the deuce he could
be, or whether he had really ever, anywhere--in the body or in the
spirit--encountered him, as he used to feel with a boding vagueness he
had done. And then those accursed dreams: he was not relieved as he
expected by disclosing them. The sense of an ominous meaning pointing at
him in all their grotesque images and scenery, still haunted him.

'Parson Walsingham, with all his reading,' his mind muttered, as it
were, to itself, 'is no better than an old woman; and that knave and
buffoon, Mr. Apothecary Toole, looked queer, the spiteful dog, just to
disquiet me. I wonder at Dr. Walsingham though. A sensible man would
have laughed me into spirits. On my soul, I think he believes in
dreams.' And Sturk laughed within himself scornfully. It was all
affectation, and addressed strictly to himself, who saw through it all;
but still he practised it. 'If these infernal losses had not come to
spoil my stomach. I should not have remembered them, much less let them
haunt me this way, like a cursed file of ghosts. I'll try gentian
to-morrow.'

Everything and everyone was poking at the one point of his secret
fears. Dr. Walsingham preached a sermon upon the text, 'remember the
days of darkness for they are many.' It went over the tremendous themes
of death and judgment in the rector's own queer, solemn, measured way,
and all the day after rang in Sturk's ear as the drums and fifes in the
muffled peal of the Dead March used to do long ago, before his ear grew
familiar with its thrilling roll. Sermons usually affected Sturk no more
than they did other military gentlemen. But he was in a morbid state;
and in this one or two terms or phrases, nothing in themselves, happened
to touch upon a sensitive and secret centre of pain in the doctor's
soul.

For instance, when he called death 'the great bankruptcy which would
make the worldly man, in a moment, the only person in his house not
worth a shilling,' the preacher glanced unconsciously at a secret fear
in the caverns of Sturk's mind, that echoed back the sonorous tones and
grisly theme of the rector with a hollow thunder.

There was a time when Sturk, like other shrewd, bustling fellows, had no
objection to hear who had an execution in his house, who was bankrupt,
and who laid by the heels; but now he shrunk from such phrases. He hated
to think that a clever fellow was ever absolutely beggared in the
world's great game. He turned his eye quickly from the Gazette, as it
lay with other papers on the club table; for its grim pages seemed to
look in his face with a sort of significance, as if they might some day
or other have a small official duty to perform by him; and when an
unexpected bankruptcy was announced by Cluffe or Toole in the club-room,
it made his ear ring like a slap, and he felt sickish for half an hour
after.

One of that ugly brood of dreams which haunted his nights, borrowed,
perhaps, a hint from Dr. Walsingham's sermon. Sturk thought he heard
Toole's well-known, brisk voice, under his windows, exclaim, 'What is
the dirty beggar doing there? faugh!--he smells all over like
carrion--ha, ha ha!' and looking out, in his dream, from his
drawing-room window, he saw a squalid mendicant begging alms at his
hall-door. 'Hollo, you, Sir; what do want there?' cried the surgeon,
with a sort of unaccountable antipathy and fear. 'He lost his last
shilling in the great bankruptcy, in October,' answered Dunstan's voice
behind his ear; and in the earth-coloured face which the beggar turned
up towards him, Sturk recognised his own features--''Tis I'--he gasped
out with an oath, and awoke in a horror, not knowing where he was.
'I--I'm dying.'

'October,' thought Sturk--'bankruptcy. 'Tis just because I'm always
thinking of that infernal bill, and old Dyle's renewal, and the rent.'

Indeed, the surgeon had a stormy look forward, and the navigation of
October was so threatening, awful, and almost desperate, as he stood
alone through the dreadful watches at the helm, with hot cheek and
unsteady hand, trusting stoically to luck and hoping against hope, that
rocks would melt, and the sea cease from drowning, that it was almost a
wonder he did not leap overboard, only for the certainty of a cold head
and a quiet heart, and one deep sleep.

And, then, he used to tot up his liabilities for that accursed month,
near whose yawning verge he already stood; and then, think of every
penny coming to him, and what might be rescued and wrung from runaways
and bankrupts whose bills he held, and whom he used to curse in his bed,
with his fists and his teeth clenched, when poor little Mrs. Sturk,
knowing naught of this danger, and having said her prayers, lay sound
asleep by his side. Then he used to think, if he could only get the
agency in time it would set him up--he could borrow Â£200 the day after
his appointment; and he must make a push and extend his practice. It was
ridiculous, that blackguard little Toole carrying off the best families
in the neighbourhood, and standing in the way of a man like him; and
Nutter, too--why, Lord Castlemallard knew as well as he did, that Nutter
was not fit to manage the property, and that he was--and Nutter
without a child or anyone, and he with seven! and he counted them over
mentally with a groan. 'What was to become of them?' Then Nutter would
be down upon him, without mercy, for the rent; and Dangerfield, if,
indeed, he cared to do it [curse it, he trusted nobody], could not
control him; and Lord Castlemallard, the selfish profligate, was away in
Paris, leaving his business in the hands of that bitter old botch, who'd
go any length to be the ruin of him.

Then he turned over the chances of borrowing a hundred pounds from the
general--as he did fifty times every day and night, but always with the
same result--'No; curse him, he's as weak as water--petticoat
government--he'll do nothing without his sister's leave, and she hates
me like poison;' and then he thought--'it would not be much to ask Lord
Castlemallard--there's still time--to give me a month or two for the
rent, but if the old sneak thought I owed twopence, I might whistle for
the agency, and besides, faith!--I don't think he'd interfere.'

Then the clock down stairs would strike 'three,' and he felt thankful,
with a great sigh, that so much of the night was over, and yet dreaded
the morning.

And then he would con over his chances again, and think which was most
likely to give him a month or two. Old Dyle--'Bah! he's a stone, he
would not give me an hour. Or Carny, curse him, unless Lucas would move
him. And, no, Lucas is a rogue, selfish beast: he owes me his place; and
I don't think he'd stir his finger to snatch me from perdition. Or
Nutter--Nutter, indeed!--why that fiend has been waiting half the year
round to put in his distress the first hour he can.'

And then Sturk writhed round on his back, as we may suppose might St.
Anthony on his gridiron, and rolled his eye-balls up toward the dark
bed; and uttered a dismal groan, and thought of the three inexorable
fates, Carny, Nutter, and Dyle, who at that moment held among them the
measure, and the thread, and the shears of his destiny: and standing
desperately in the dark at the verge of the abyss, he mentally hurled
the three ugly spirits together into his bag, and flung them whirling
through the mirk into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.








 STURK TRIES THIS WAY AND THAT FOR A REPRIEVE ON THE EVE OF
EXECUTION.


So time crept on, and the day arrived when Sturk must pay his rent, or
take the ugly consequences. The day before he spent in Dublin
financiering. It was galling and barren work. He had to ask favours of
fellows whom he hated, and to stand their refusals, and pretend to
believe their lying excuses, and appear to make quite light of it,
though every failure stunned him like a blow of a bludgeon, and as he
strutted jauntily off with a bilious smirk, he was well nigh at his
wits' end. It was dark as he rode out by the low road to
Chapelizod--crest-fallen, beaten--scowling in the darkness through his
horse's ears along the straight black line of road, and wishing, as he
passed the famous Dog-house, that he might be stopped and plundered, and
thus furnished with a decent excuse for his penniless condition, and a
plea in which all the world would sympathise for a short
indulgence--and, faith! he did not much care if they sent a bullet
through his harassed brain. But the highwaymen, like the bankers, seemed
to know, by instinct, that he had not a guinea, and declined to give him
even the miserable help he coveted.

When he got home he sent down for Cluffe to the Phoenix, and got him
to take Nutter, who was there also, aside, and ask him for a little
time, or to take part of the rent. Though the latter would not have
helped him much; for he could not make out ten pounds just then, were it
to save his life. But Nutter only said--

'The rent's not mine; I can't give it or lose it; and Sturk's not safe.
Will you lend it? I can't.'

This brought Cluffe to reason. He had opened the business, like a jolly
companion, in a generous, full-blooded way.

'Well, by Jove, Nutter, I can't blame you; for you see, between
ourselves, I'm afraid 'tis as you say. We of the Royal Irish have done,
under the rose, you know, all we can; and I'm sorry the poor devil has
run himself into a scrape; but hang it, we must have a conscience; and
if you think there's a risk of losing it, why I don't see that I can
press you.

The reader must not suppose when Cluffe said, 'we of the Royal Irish,'
in connection with some pecuniary kindness shown to Sturk, that that
sensible captain had given away any of his money to the surgeon; but
Sturk, in their confidential conference, had hinted something about a
'helping hand,' which Cluffe coughed off, and mentioned that Puddock had
lent him fifteen pounds the week before.

And so he had, though little Puddock was one of the poorest officers in
the corps. But he had no vices, and husbanded his little means
carefully, and was very kindly and off-hand in assisting to the extent
of his little purse a brother in distress, and never added advice when
so doing--for he had high notions of politeness--or, in all his life,
divulged any of these little money transactions.

Sturk stood at his drawing-room window, with his hat on, looking towards
the Phoenix, and waiting for Cluffe's return. When he could stand the
suspense no longer, he went down and waited at his door-steps. And the
longer Cluffe stayed the more did Sturk establish himself in the
conviction that the interview had prospered, and that his ambassador was
coming to terms with Nutter. He did not know that the entire question
had been settled in a minute-and-a-half, and that Cluffe was at that
moment rattling away at backgammon with his arch-enemy, Toole, in a
corner of the club parlour.

It was not till Cluffe, as he emerged from the Phoenix, saw Sturk's
figure stalking in the glimpses of the moon, under the village elm, that
he suddenly recollected and marched up to him. Sturk stood, with his
face and figure mottled over with the shadows of the moving leaves and
the withered ones dropping about him, his hands in his pockets, and a
crown-piece--I believe it was his last available coin just then--shut up
fast and tight in his cold fingers, with his heart in his mouth, and
whistling a little to show his unconcern.

'Well,' said Sturk, 'he won't, of course?'

Cluffe shook his head.

'Very good--I'll manage it another way,' said Sturk, confidently.
'Good-night;' and Sturk walked off briskly towards the turnpike.

'He might have said "thank you," I think,' Cluffe said, looking after
him with a haughty leer--'mixing myself up in his plaguy affairs, and
asking favours of fellows like Nutter.' But just then, having reached
the corner next the Phoenix, Sturk hesitated, and Cluffe, thinking he
might possibly turn back and ask him for money, turned on his heel, and,
like a prudent fellow, trudged rapidly off to his lodgings.

Toole and O'Flaherty were standing in the doorway of the Phoenix,
observing the brief and secret meeting under the elm.

'That's Sturk,' said Toole.

O'Flaherty grunted acquiescence.

Toole watched attentively till the gentlemen separated, and then
glancing on O'Flaherty from the corner of his eye, with a knowing smile,
'tipped him the wink,' as the phrase went in those days.

'An affair of honour?' said O'Flaherty, squaring himself. He smelt
powder in everything.

'More like an affair of dishonour,' said Toole, buttoning his coat.
'He's been "kiting" all over the town. Nutter can distrain for his rent
to-morrow, and Cluffe called him outside the bar to speak with him; put
that and that together, Sir.' And home went Toole.

Sturk, indeed, had no plan, and was just then incapable of forming any.
He changed his route, not knowing why, and posted over the bridge, and a
good way along the Inchicore road, and then turned about and strode back
again and over the bridge, without stopping, and on towards Dublin; and
suddenly the moon shone out, and he recollected how late it was growing,
and so turned about and walked homeward.

As he passed by the row of houses looking across the road towards the
river, from Mr. Irons's hall-door step a well-known voice accosted him--

'A thweet night, doctor--the moon tho thilver bright--the air tho
thoft!'

It was little Puddock, whose hand and face were raised toward the sweet
regent of the sky.

'Mighty fine night,' said Sturk, and he paused for a second. It was
Puddock's way to be more than commonly friendly and polite with any man
who owed him money; and Sturk, who thought, perhaps rightly, that the
world of late had been looking cold and black upon him, felt, in a sort
of way, thankful for the greeting and its cordial tone.

'A night like this,' pursued the little lieutenant, 'my dear Sir, brings
us under the marble balconies of the palace of the Capulets, and sets us
repeating "On such a night sat Dido on the wild seabanks"--you
remember--"and with a willow wand, waved her love back to Carthage,"--or
places us upon the haunted platform, where buried Denmark revisits the
glimpses of the moon. My dear doctor, 'tis wonderful--isn't it--how much
of our enjoyment of Nature we owe to Shakespeare--'twould be a changed
world with us, doctor, if Shakespeare had not written--' Then there was
a little pause, Sturk standing still.

'God be wi' ye, lieutenant,' said he, suddenly taking his hand. 'If
there were more men like you there would be fewer broken hearts in the
world.' And away went Sturk.











When Magnolia and the major had gone out, each on their several devices,
poor Mrs. Macnamara called Biddy, their maid, and told her, in a
vehement, wheezy, confidential whisper in her ear, though there was
nobody by but themselves, and the door was shut.

'Biddy, now mind--d'ye see--the lady that came to me in the end of
July--do you remember?--in the black satin--you know?--she'll be here
to-day, and we're going down together in her coach to Mrs. Nutter's; but
that does not signify. As soon as she comes, bring her in here, into
this room--d'ye mind?--and go across that instant minute--d'ye see
now?--straight to Dr. Toole, and ask him to send me the peppermint drops
he promised me.'

Then she cross-questioned Biddy, to ascertain that she perfectly
understood and clearly remembered; and, finally, she promised her
half-a-crown if she peformed this very simple commission to her
mistress's satisfaction and held her tongue religiously on the subject.
She had apprised Toole the evening before, and now poor 'Mrs. Mack's
sufferings, she hoped, were about to be brought to a happy termination
by the doctor's ingenuity. She was, however, very nervous indeed, as the
crisis approached; for such a beast as Mary Matchwell at bay was a
spectacle to excite a little tremor even in a person of more nerve than
fat Mrs. Macnamara.

And what could Mary Matchwell want of a conjuring conference, of all
persons in the world, with poor little Mrs. Nutter? Mrs. Mack had done
in this respect simply as she was bid. She had indeed no difficulty to
persuade Mrs. Nutter to grant the interview. That harmless little
giggling creature could not resist the mere mention of a fortune-teller.
Only for Nutter, who set his face against this sort of sham witchcraft,
she would certainly have asked him to treat her with a glimpse into
futurity at that famous-sibyl's house; and now that she had an
opportunity of having the enchantress tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte in her own snug
parlour at the Mills, she was in a delightful fuss of mystery and
delight.

Mrs. Mack, indeed, from her own sad experience, felt a misgiving and a
pang in introducing the formidable prophetess. But what could she do?
She dared not refuse; all she could risk was an anxious hint to poor
little Mrs. Nutter, 'not to be telling her anything, good, bad, or
indifferent, but just to ask her what questions she liked, and no more.'
Indeed, poor Mrs. Mack was low and feverish about this assignation, and
would have been more so but for the hope that her Polonius, behind the
arras, would bring the woman of Endor to her knees.

All on a sudden she heard the rumble and jingle of a hackney coach, and
the clang of the horses' hoofs pulled up close under her window; her
heart bounded and fluttered up to her mouth, and then dropped down like
a lump of lead, and she heard a well-known voice talk a few sentences to
the coachman, and then in the hall, as she supposed, to Biddy; and so
she came into the room, dressed as usual in black, tall, thin, and
erect, with a black hood shading her pale face and the mist and chill of
night seemed to enter along with her.

It was a great relief to poor Mrs. Mack, that she actually saw Biddy at
that moment run across the street toward Toole's hall-door, and she
quickly averted her conscious glance from the light-heeled handmaid.

'Pray take a chair, Ma'am,' said Mrs. Mack, with a pallid face and a low
courtesy.

Mistress Matchwell made a faint courtesy in return, and, without saying
anything, sat down, and peered sharply round the room.

'I'm glad, Ma'am, you had no dust to-day; the rain, Ma'am, laid it
beautiful.'

The grim woman in black threw back her hood a little, and showed her
pale face and thin lips, and prominent black eyes, altogether a grisly
and intimidating countenance, with something wild and suspicious in it,
suiting by no means ill with her supernatural and malign pretensions.

Mrs. Mack's ear was strained to catch the sound of Toole's approach, and
a pause ensued, during which she got up and poured out a glass of port
for the lady, and she presented it to her deferentially. She took it
with a nod, and sipped it, thinking, as it seemed, uneasily. There was
plainly something more than usual upon her mind. Mrs. Mack
thought--indeed, she was quite sure--she heard a little fussing about
the bed-room door, and concluded that the doctor was getting under
cover.

When Mrs. Matchwell had set her empty glass upon the table, she glided
to the window, and Mrs. Mack's guilty conscience smote her, as she saw
her look towards Toole's house. It was only, however, for the coach; and
having satisfied herself it was at hand, she said--

'We'll have some minutes quite private, if you please--'tisn't my
affair, you know, but yours,' said the weird woman.

There had been ample time for the arrangement of Toole's ambuscade. Now
was the moment. The crisis was upon her. But poor Mrs. Mack, just as she
was about to say her little say about the front windows and opposite
neighbours, and the privacy of the back bed-room, and to propose their
retiring thither, felt a sinking of the heart--a deadly faintness, and
an instinctive conviction that she was altogether overmatched, and that
she could not hope to play successfully any sort of devil's game with
that all-seeing sorceress. She had always thought she was a plucky woman
till she met Mistress Mary. Before her her spirit died within her--her
blood flowed hurriedly back to her heart, leaving her body cold, pale,
and damp, and her soul quailing under her gaze.

She cleared her voice twice, and faltered an enquiry, but broke down in
panic; and at that moment Biddy popped in her head--

'The doctor, Ma'am, was sent for to Lucan, an' he won't be back till six
o'clock, an' he left no peppermint drops for you, Ma'am, an' do you want
me, if you plase, Ma'am?'

'Go down, Biddy, that'll do,' said Mrs. Mack, growing first pale, and
then very red.

Mary Matchwell scented death afar off; for her the air was always
tainted with ominous perfumes. Every unusual look or dubious word
thrilled her with a sense of danger. Suspicion is the baleful instinct
of self-preservation with which the devil gifts his children; and hers
never slept.

'What doctor?' said Mrs. Matchwell, turning her large, dismal, wicked
gaze full on Mrs. Mack.

'Doctor Toole, Ma'am.' She dared not tell a literal lie to that
piercing, prominent pair of black eyes.

'And why did you send for Doctor O'Toole, Ma'am?'

'I did not send for the doctor,' answered the fat lady, looking down,
for she could not stand that glance that seemed to light up all the
caverns of her poor soul, and make her lies stand forth self-confessed.
'I did not send for him, Ma'am, only for some drops he promised me. I've
been very sick--I--I--I'm so miserable.'

And poor Mrs. Mack's nether lip quivered, and she burst into tears.

'You're enough to provoke a saint, Mrs. Macnamara,' said the woman in
black, rather savagely, though coldly enough. 'Why you're on the point
of fortune, as it seems to me.' Here poor Mrs. Mack's inarticulate
lamentations waxed more vehement. 'You don't believe it--very well--but
where's the use of crying over your little difficulties, Ma'am, like a
great baby, instead of exerting yourself and thanking your best friend?'

And the two ladies sat down to a murmuring tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte at the far end
of the room; you could have heard little more than an inarticulate
cooing, and poor Mrs. Mack's sobs, and the stern--

'And is that all? I've had more trouble with you than with fifty
reasonable clients--you can hardly be serious--I tell you plainly, you
must manage matters better, my good Madam; for, frankly, Ma'am, this
won't do.'

With which that part of the conference closed, and Mary Matchwell looked
out of the window. The coach stood at the door, the horses dozing
patiently, with their heads together, and the coachman, with a black
eye, mellowing into the yellow stage, and a cut across his nose--both
doing well--was marching across from the public-house over the way,
wiping his mouth in the cuff of his coat.

'Put on your riding-hood, if you please, Madam, and come down with me in
the coach to introduce me to Mrs. Nutter,' said Mrs. Matchwell, at the
same time tapping with her long bony fingers to the driver.

'There's no need of that, Madam. I said what you desired, and I sent a
note to her last night, and she expects you just now; and, indeed, I'd
rather not go, Madam, if you please.'

''Tis past that now--just do as I tell you, for come you must,' answered
Mrs. Matchwell.

As the old woman of Berkley obeyed, and got up and went quietly away
with her visitor, though her dead flesh quivered with fear, so poor Mrs.
Mack, though loath enough, submitted in silence.

'Now, you look like a body going to be hanged--you do; what's the matter
with you, Madam? I tell you, you mustn't look that way. Here, take a sup
o' this;' and she presented the muzzle of a small bottle like a pistol
at her mouth as she spoke--

'There's a glass on the table, if you let me, Ma'am,' said Mrs. Mack.

'Glass be----; here, take a mouthful.'

And she popped it between her lips; and Mrs. Mack was refreshed and her
spirit revived within her.





, ORDERS
TEA.


Poor Mrs. Nutter, I have an honest regard for her memory. If she was
scant of brains, she was also devoid of guile--giggle and raspberry-jam
were the leading traits of her character. And though she was slow to
believe ill-natured stories, and made, in general, a horrid jumble when
she essayed to relate news, except of the most elementary sort; and used
to forget genealogies, and to confuse lawsuits and other family feuds,
and would have made a most unsatisfactory witness upon any topic on
earth, yet she was a ready sympathiser, and a restless but purblind
matchmaker--always suggesting or suspecting little romances, and always
amazed when the eclaircissement came off. Excellent for
condoling--better still for rejoicing--she would, on hearing of a
surprising good match, or an unexpected son and heir, or a
pleasantly-timed legacy, go off like a mild little peal of joy-bells,
and keep ringing up and down and zig-zag, and to and again, in all sorts
of irregular roulades, without stopping, the whole day long, with 'Well,
to be sure.' 'Upon my conscience, now, I scarce can believe it.' 'An'
isn't it pleasant, though.' 'Oh! the creatures--but it was badly
wanted!' 'Dear knows--but I'm glad--ha, ha, ha,' and so on. A train of
reflection and rejoicing not easily exhausted, and readily, by simple
transposition, maintainable for an indefinite period. And people, when
good news came, used to say, 'Sally Nutter will be glad to hear that;'
and though she had not a great deal of sense, and her conversation was
made up principally of interjections, assisted by little gestures, and
wonderful expressions of face; and though, when analysed it was not
much, yet she made a cheerful noise, and her company was liked; and her
friendly little gesticulation, and her turning up of the eyes, and her
smiles and sighs, and her 'whisht a bit,' and her 'faith and troth now,'
and 'whisper,' and all the rest of her little budget of idiomatic
expletives, made the people somehow, along with her sterling qualities,
fonder of her than perhaps, having her always at hand, they were quite
aware.

So they both entered the vehicle, which jingled and rattled so
incessantly and so loud that connected talk was quite out of the
question, and Mrs. Macnamara was glad 'twas so; and she could not help
observing there was something more than the ordinary pale cast of
devilment in Mary Matchwell's face--something, she thought, almost
frightful, and which tempted her to believe in her necromantic faculty.

So they reached Nutter's house, at the mills, a sober, gray-fronted
mansion, darkened with tall trees, and in went Mrs. Mack. Little Mrs.
Nutter received her in a sort of transport of eagerness, giggle, and
curiosity.

'And is she really in the coach now? and, my dear, does she really tell
the wonders they say? Mrs. Molly told me--well, now, the most surprising
things; and do you actually believe she's a conjuror? But mind you,
Nutter must not know I had her here. He can't abide a fortune-teller.
And what shall I ask her? I think about the pearl cross--don't you? For
I would like to know, and then whether Nutter or his enemies--you know
who I mean--will carry the day--don't you know? Doctor Sturk, my dear,
and--and--but that's the chief question.'

Poor Mrs. Mack glanced over her shoulder to see she wasn't watched, and
whispered her in haste--

'For mercy's sake, my dear, take my advice, and that is, listen to all
she tells you, but tell her nothing.'

'To be sure, my dear, that's only common sense,' said Mrs. Nutter.

And Mary Matchwell, who thought they had been quite long enough
together, descended from the carriage, and was in the hall before Mrs.
Nutter was aware; and the silent apparition overawed the poor little
lady, who faltered a 'Good-evening, Madam--you're very welcome--pray
step in.' So in they all trooped to Nutter's parlour.

So soon as little Mrs. Nutter got fairly under the chill and shadow of
this inauspicious presence, her giggle subsided, and she began to think
of the dreadful story she had heard of her having showed Mrs. Flemming
through a glass of fair water, the apparition of her husband with his
face half masked with blood, the day before his murder by the watchmen
in John's-lane. When, therefore, this woman of Endor called for water
and glasses, and told Mrs. Mack that she must leave them alone together,
poor little empty Mrs. Nutter lost heart, and began to feel very queer,
and to wish herself well out of the affair; and, indeed, was almost
ready to take to her heels and leave the two ladies in possession of the
house, but she had not decision for this.

'And mayn't Mrs. Mack stay in the room with us?' she asked, following
that good lady's retreating figure with an imploring look.

'By no means.'

This was addressed sternly to Mrs. Mack herself, who, followed by poor
Mrs. Nutter's eyes, moved fatly and meekly out of the room.

She was not without her fair share of curiosity, but on the whole, was
relieved, and very willing to go. She had only seen Mary Matchwell take
from her pocket and uncase a small, oval-shaped steel mirror, which
seemed to have the property of magnifying objects; for she saw her
cadaverous fingers reflected in it to fully double their natural size,
and she had half filled a glass with water, and peered through it askew,
holding it toward the light.

Well, the door was shut, and an interval of five minutes elapsed; and
all of a sudden two horrible screams in quick succession rang through
the house.

Betty, the maid, and Mrs. Mack were in the small room on the other side
of the hall, and stared in terror on one another. The old lady, holding
Betty by the wrist, whispered a benediction; and Betty crying--'Oh! my
dear, what's happened the poor misthress?' crossed the hall in a second,
followed by Mrs. Mack, and they heard the door unlocked on the inside as
they reached it.

In they came, scarce knowing how, and found poor little Mrs. Nutter flat
upon the floor, in a swoon, her white face and the front of her dress
drenched with water.

'You've a scent bottle, Mrs. Macnamara--let her smell to it,' said the
grim woman in black, coldly, but with a scarcely perceptible gleam of
triumph, as she glanced on the horrified faces of the women.

Well, it was a long fainting-fit; but she did come out of it. And when
her bewildered gaze at last settled upon Mrs. Matchwell, who was
standing darkly and motionless between the windows, she uttered another
loud and horrible cry, and clung with her arms round Mrs. Mack's neck,
and screamed--

'Oh! Mrs. Mack, there she is--there she is--there she is.'

And she screamed so fearfully and seemed in such an extremity of terror,
that Mary Matchwell, in her sables, glided, with a strange sneer on her
pale face, out of the room across the hall, and into the little parlour
on the other side, like an evil spirit whose mission was half
accomplished, and who departed from her for a season.

'She's here--she's here!' screamed poor little Mrs. Nutter.

'No, dear, no--she's not--she's gone, my dear, indeed she's gone,'
replied Mrs. Mack, herself very much appalled.

'Oh! is she gone--is she--is she gone?' cried Mrs. Nutter, staring all
round the room, like a child after a frightful dream.

'She's gone, Ma'am, dear--she isn't here--by this crass, she's gone!'
said Betty, assisting Mrs. Mack, and equally frightened and incensed.

'Oh! oh! Betty, where is he gone? Oh! Mrs. Mack--oh! no--no--never! It
can't be--it couldn't. It is not he--he never did it.'

'I declare to you, Ma'am, she's not right in her head!' cried poor
Betty, at her wits' ends.

'There--there now, Sally, darling--there,' said frightened Mrs.
Mack, patting her on the back.

'There--there--there--I see him,' she cried again. 'Oh!
Charley,--Charley, sure--sure I didn't see it aright--it was not real.'

'There now, don't be frettin' yourself, Ma'am dear,' said Betty.

But Mrs. Mack glanced over her shoulder in the direction in which Mrs.
Nutter was looking, and with a sort of shock, not knowing whether it was
a bodily presence or a simulacrum raised by the incantations of Mary
Matchwell, she beheld the dark features and white eye-balls of Nutter
himself looking full on them from the open door.

'Sally--what ails you, sweetheart?' said he, coming close up to her with
two swift steps.

'Oh! Charley--'twas a dream--nothing else--a bad dream, Charley. Oh! say
it's a dream,' cried the poor terrified little woman. 'Oh! she's
coming--she's coming!' she cried again, with an appalling scream.

'Who--what's the matter?' cried Nutter, looking in the direction of
his poor wife's gaze in black wrath and bewilderment, and beholding the
weird woman who had followed him into the room. As he gazed on that
pale, wicked face and sable shape, the same sort of spell which she
exercised upon Mrs. Mack, and poor Mrs. Nutter, seemed in a few seconds
to steal over Nutter himself, and fix him in the place where he stood.
His mahogany face bleached to sickly boxwood, and his eyes looked like
pale balls of stone about to leap from their sockets.

After a few seconds, however, with a sort of gasp, like a man awaking
from a frightful sleep, he said--

'Betty, take the mistress to her room;' and to his wife, 'go,
sweetheart. Mrs. Macnamara, this must be explained,' he added; and
taking her by the hand, he led her in silence to the hall-door, and
signed to the driver.

'Oh! thank you, Mr. Nutter,' she stammered; 'but the coach is not mine;
it came with that lady who's with Mrs. Nutter.'

He had up to this moved with her like a somnambulist.

'Ay, that lady; and who the devil is she?' and he seized her arm with a
sudden grasp that made her wince.

'Oh! that lady!' faltered Mrs. Mack--'she's, I believe--she's Mrs.
Matchwell--the--the lady that advertises her abilities.'

'Hey! I know--the fortune-teller, and go-between,--her!'

She was glad he asked her no more questions, but let her go, and stood
in a livid meditation, forgetting to bid her good evening. She did not
wait, however, for his courteous dismissal, but hurried away towards
Chapelizod. The only thing connected with the last half-hour's events
that seemed quite clear and real to the scared lady was the danger of
being overtaken by that terrible woman, and a dreadful sense of her own
share as an accessory in the untold mischief that had befallen poor Mrs.
Nutter.

In the midst of her horrors and agitation Mrs. Mack's curiosity was not
altogether stunned. She wondered vaguely, as she pattered along, with
what dreadful exhibition of her infernal skill Mary Matchwell had
disordered the senses of poor little Mrs. Nutter--had she called up a
red-eyed, sooty-raven to her shoulder--as old Miss Alice Lee (when she
last had a dish of tea with her) told her she had once done before--and
made the ominous bird speak the doom of poor Mrs. Nutter from that
perch? or had she raised the foul fiend in bodily shape, or showed her
Nutter's dead face through the water?

With these images flitting before her brain, she hurried on at her best
pace, fancying every moment that she heard the rumble of the accursed
coach behind her, and longing to see the friendly uniform of the Royal
Irish Artillery, and the familiar house fronts of the cheery little
street, and above all, to hide herself securely among her own household
gods.

When Nutter returned to the parlour his wife had not yet left it.

'I'll attend here, go you up stairs,' said Nutter. He spoke strangely,
and looked odd, and altogether seemed strung up to a high pitch.

Out went Betty, seeing it was no good dawdling; for her master was
resolute and formidable. The room, like others in old-fashioned houses
with thick walls, had a double door. He shut the one with a stern slam,
and then the other; and though the honest maid loitered in the hall,
and, indeed, placed her ear very near the door, she was not much the
wiser.

There was some imperfectly heard talk in the parlour, and cries, and
sobs, and more talking. Then before Betty was aware, the door suddenly
opened, and out came Mary Matchwell, with gleaming eyes, and a pale
laugh of spite and victory and threw a look, as she passed, upon the
maid that frightened her, and so vanished into her coach.

Nutter disengaged himself from poor Mrs. Nutter's arms, in which he was
nearly throttled, while she sobbed and shrieked--

'Oh! Charley, dear--dearest Charley--Charley, darling--isn't it
frightful?' and so on.

'Betty, take care of her,' was all he said, and that sternly, like a man
quietly desperate, but with a dismal fury in his face.

He went into the little room on the other side of the now darkening
hall, and shut the door, and locked it inside. It was partly because he
did not choose to talk just now any more with his blubbering and
shrieking wife. He was a very kind husband, in his way, but a most
incapable nurse, especially in a case of hysterics.

He came out with a desk in his hands.

'Moggy,' he said, in a low tone, seeing his other servant-woman in the
dusk crossing at the foot of the stairs, 'here, take this desk, leave it
in our bed-room--'tis for the mistress; tell her so by-and-by.'

The wench carried it up; but poor Mrs. Nutter was in no condition to
comprehend anything, and was talking quite wildly, and seemed to be
growing worse rather than better.

Nutter stood alone in the hall, with his back to the door from which he
had just emerged, his hands in his pockets, and the same dreary and
wicked shadow over his face.

'So that----Sturk will carry his point after all,' he muttered.

On the hall wainscot just opposite hung his horse-pistols; and when he
saw them, and that wasn't for a while--for though he was looking
straight at them, he was staring, really, quite through the dingy wooden
panel at quite other objects three hundred miles away--when he did see
them, I say, he growled in the same tone--

'I wish one of those bullets was through my head, so t'other was through
his.'

And he cursed him with laconic intensity. Then Nutter slapped his
pockets, like a man feeling if his keys and other portable chattels are
all right before he leaves his home. But his countenance was that of one
whose mind is absent and wandering. And he looked down on the ground, as
it seemed in profound and troubled abstraction; and, after a while, he
looked up again, and again glared on the cold pistols that hung before
him--ready for anything. And he took down one with a snatch and weighed
it in his hand, and fell to thinking again; and, as he did, kept opening
and shutting the pan with a snap, and so for a long time, and thinking
deeply to the tune of that castanet, and at last he roused himself, who
knows from what dreams, and hung up the weapon again by its fellow, and
looked about him.

The hall-door lay open, as Mary Matchwell had left it. Nutter stood on
the door-step, where he could hear faintly, from above stairs, the cries
and wails of poor, hysterical Mrs. Nutter. He remained there a good
while, during which, unperceived by him, Dr. Toole's pestle-and-mortar-boy,
who had entered by the back-way, had taken a seat in the hall. He was
waiting for an empty draught-bottle, in exchange for a replenished flask
of the same agreeable beverage, which he had just delivered; for physic
was one of poor Mrs. Nutter's weaknesses, though, happily, she did not
swallow half what came home for her.

When Nutter turned round, the boy--a sharp, tattling vagabond, he knew
him well--was reading a printed card he had picked up from the floor,
with the impress of Nutter's hob-nailed tread upon it. It was endorsed
upon the back, 'For Mrs. Macnamara, with the humble duty of her obedient
servant, M. M.'

'What's that, Sirrah?' shouted Nutter.

'For Mrs. Nutter, I think, Sir,' said the urchin, jumping up with a
start.

'Mrs. Nutter,' repeated he--'No--Mrs. Mac--Macnamara,' and he thrust it
into his surtout pocket. 'And what brings you here, Sirrah?' he added
savagely; for he thought everybody was spying after him now, and, as I
said, he knew him for a tattling young dog--he had taken the infection
from his master, who had trained him.

'Here, woman,' he cried to Moggy, who was passing again, 'give that
pimping rascal his ---- answer; and see, Sirrah, if I find you sneaking
about the place again, I'll lay that whip across your back.'

Nutter went into the small room again.

'An' how are ye, Jemmie--how's every inch iv you?' enquired Moggy of the
boy, when his agitation was a little blown over.

'I'm elegant, thank ye,' he answered; 'an' what's the matther wid ye
all? I cum through the kitchen, and seen no one.'

'Och! didn't you hear? The poor mistress--she's as bad as bad can be.'
And then began a whispered confidence, broken short by Nutter's again
emerging, with the leather belt he wore at night on, and a short
back-sword, called a coutteau de chasse, therein, and a heavy
walking-cane in his hand.

'Get tea for me, wench, in half an hour,' said he, this time quite
quietly, though still sternly, and without seeming to observe the
quaking boy, who, at first sight, referred these martial preparations to
a resolution to do execution upon him forthwith; 'you'll find me in the
garden when it's ready.'

And he strode out, and pushing open the wicket door in the thick garden
hedge, and, with his cane shouldered, walked with a quick, resolute step
down towards the pretty walk by the river, with the thick privet hedge
and the row of old pear trees by it. And that was the last that was
heard or seen of Mr. Nutter for some time.








At about half-past six that evening, Puddock arrived at Captain Cluffe's
lodgings, and for the last time the minstrels rehearsed their lovelorn
and passionate ditties. They were drest 'all in their best,' under that
outer covering, which partly for mystery and partly for bodily
comfort--the wind, after the heavy rains of the last week, having come
round to the east--these prudent troubadours wore.

Though they hardly glanced at the topic to one another, each had his
delightful anticipations of the chances of the meeting. Puddock did not
value Dangerfield a rush, and Cluffe's mind was pretty easy upon that
point from the moment his proposal for Gertrude Chattesworth had taken
wind.

Only for that cursed shower the other night, that made it incumbent on
Cluffe, who had had two or three sharp little visits of his patrimonial
gout, and no notion of dying for love, to get to his quarters as quickly
as might be--he had no doubt that the last stave of their first duet
rising from the meadow of Belmont, with that charming roulade--devised
by Puddock, and the pathetic twang-twang of his romantic instrument,
would have been answered by the opening of the drawing-room window, and
Aunt Becky's imperious summons to the serenaders to declare themselves,
and come in and partake of supper!

The only thing that at all puzzled him, unpleasantly connected with that
unsuccessful little freak of musical love-making, was the fellow they
saw getting away from under the open window--the very same at which
Lilias Walsingham had unintentionally surprised her friend Gertrude. He
had a surtout on, with the cape cut exactly after the fashion of
Dangerfield, and a three-cocked hat with very pinched corners, in the
French style, which identical hat Cluffe was ready to swear he saw upon
Dangerfield's head very early one morning, as he accidentally espied him
viewing his peas and tulips in the little garden of the Brass Castle by
the river side.

'Twas fixed, in fact, in Cluffe's mind that Dangerfield was the man; and
what the plague need had a declared lover of any such clandestine
manoeuvres. Was it possible that the old scoundrel was, after all,
directing his night visits differently, and keeping the aunt in play, as
a reserve, in the event of the failure of his suit to the niece? Plans
as gross, he knew, had succeeded; old women were so devilish easily won,
and loved money too, so well sometimes.

These sly fellows agreed that they must not go to Belmont by
Chapelizod-bridge, which would lead them through the town, in front of
the barrack, and under the very sign-board of the Phoenix. No, they
would go by the Knockmaroon-road, cross the river by the ferry, and
unperceived, and unsuspected, enter the grounds of Belmont on the
further side.

So away went the amorous musicians, favoured by the darkness, and
talking in an undertone, and thinking more than they talked, while
little Puddock, from under his cloak, scratched a faint little arpeggio
and a chord, ever and anon, upon 'the inthrument.'

When they reached the ferry, the boat was tied at the near side, but
deuce a ferryman could they see. So they began to shout and hallo,
singly, and together, until Cluffe, in much ire and disgust, exclaimed--

'Curse the sot--drunk in some whiskey-shop--the blackguard! That is the
way such scoundrels throw away their chances, and help to fill the high
roads with beggars and thieves; curse him, I sha'n't have a note left if
we go on bawling this way. I suppose we must go home again.'

'Fiddle-thtick!' exclaimed the magnanimous Puddock. 'I pulled myself
across little more than a year ago, and 'twas as easy as--as--anything.
Get in, an' loose her when I tell you.'

This boat was managed by means of a rope stretched across the stream
from bank to bank; seizing which, in both hands, the boatman, as he
stood in his skiff, hauled it, as it seemed, with very moderate exertion
across the river.

Cluffe chuckled as he thought how sold the rascally boatman would be, on
returning, to find his bark gone over to the other side.

'Don't be uneathy about the poor fellow,' said Puddock; 'we'll come down
in the morning and make him a present, and explain how it occurred.'

'Explain yourself--poor fellow, be hanged!' muttered Cluffe, as he
took his seat, for he did not part with his silver lightly. 'I say,
Puddock, tell me when I'm to slip the rope.'

The signal given, Cluffe let go, entertaining himself with a little
jingle of Puddock's guitar, of which he had charge, and a verse or two
of their last song; while the plump little lieutenant, standing upright,
midships in the boat, hauled away, though not quite so deftly as was
desirable. Some two or three minutes had passed before they reached the
middle of the stream, which was, as Puddock afterwards remarked,
'gigantically thwollen;' and at this point they came to something very
like a stand-still.

'I say, Puddock, keep her head a little more up the stream, will you?'
said Cluffe, thinking no evil, and only to show his nautical knowledge.

'It's easy to say keep her head up the stream,' gasped Puddock who was
now labouring fearfully, and quite crimson in the face, tugging his
words up with a desperate lisp, and too much out of breath to say more.

The shades of the night and the roar of the waters prevented Cluffe
observing these omens aright.

'What the plague are you doing now? cried Cluffe, arresting a
decorative passage in the middle, and for the first time seriously
uncomfortable, as the boat slowly spun round, bringing what Cluffe
called her head--though head and tail were pretty much alike--toward the
bank they had quitted.

'Curse you, Puddock, why--what are you going back for? you can't do it.'

'Lend a hand,' bawled Puddock, in extremity. 'I say, help, seize the
rope; I say, Cluffe, quick, Sir, my arms are breaking.'

There was no exaggeration in this--there seldom was in any thing Puddock
said; and the turn of the boat had twisted his arms like the strands of
a rope.

'Hold on, Puddock, curse you, I'm comin',' roared Cluffe, quite alive to
the situation. 'If you let go, I'm diddled but I'll shoot you.'

'Catch the rope, I thay, Thir, or 'tith all over!'

Cluffe, who had only known that he was slowly spinning round, and that
Puddock was going to commit him to the waves, made a vehement exertion
to catch the rope, but it was out of reach, and the boat rocked so
suddenly from his rising, that he sat down by mistake again, with a
violent plump that made his teeth gnash, in his own place; and the shock
and his alarm stimulated his anger.

'Hold on, Sir; hold on, you little devil, I say, one minute,
here--hold--hollo!'

While Cluffe was shouting these words, and scrambling forward, Puddock
was crying--

'Curth it, Cluffe, quick--oh! hang it, I can't thtand it--bleth my
thoul!

And Puddock let go, and the boat and its precious freightage, with a
horrid whisk and a sweep, commenced its seaward career in the dark.

'Take the oars, Sir, hang you!' cried Cluffe.

'There are no oarth,' replied Puddock, solemnly.

'Or the helm.'

'There'th no helm.'

'And what the devil, Sir?' and a splash of cold water soused the silken
calves of Cluffe at this moment.

'Heugh! heugh!--and what the devil will you do, Sir? you don't want to
drown me, I suppose?' roared Cluffe, holding hard by the gunwale.

'You can thwim, Cluffe; jump in, and don't mind me,' said little
Puddock, sublimely.

Cluffe, who was a bit of a boaster, had bragged, one evening at mess,
of his swimming, which he said was famous in his school days; 'twas a
lie, but Puddock believed it implicitly.

'Thank you!' roared Cluffe. 'Swim, indeed!--buttoned up this
way--and--and the gout too.'

'I say, Cluffe, save the guitar, if you can,' said Puddock.

In reply, Cluffe cursed that instrument through his teeth, with positive
fury, and its owner; and, indeed, he was so incensed at this unfeeling
request, that if he had known where it was, I think he would have gone
nigh to smash it on Puddock's head, or at least, like the 'Minstrel
Boy,' to tear its chords asunder; for Cluffe was hot, especially when he
was frightened. But he forgot--though it was hanging at that moment by a
pretty scarlet and gold ribbon about his neck.

'Guitar be diddled!' cried he; ''tis gone--where we're going--to the
bottom. What devil possessed you, Sir, to drown us this way?'

Puddock sighed. They were passing at this moment the quiet banks of the
pleasant meadow of Belmont, and the lights twinkled from the bow-window
in the drawing-room. I don't know whether Puddock saw them--Cluffe
certainly did not.

'Hallo! hallo!--a rope!' cried Cluffe, who had hit upon this desperate
expedient for raising the neighbourhood. 'A rope--a rope! hallo!
hallo!--a ro-o-o-ope!'

And Aunt Becky, who heard the wild whooping, mistook it for drunken
fellows at their diversions, and delivered her sentiments in the
drawing-room accordingly.








'We're coming to something--what's that?' said Puddock, as a long row of
black stakes presented themselves at some distance ahead, in the dusky
moonlight, slanting across the stream.

''Tis the salmon-weir!' roared Cluffe with an oath that subsided into
something like a sickening prayer.

It was only a fortnight before that a tipsy fellow had been found
drowned in the net. Cluffe had lost his head much more than Puddock,
though Cluffe had fought duels. But then, he really could not swim a
bit, and he was so confoundedly buckled up.

'Sit to the right. Trim the boat, Sir!' said little Puddock.

'Trim the devil!' bawled Cluffe, to whom this order of Puddock's, it
must be owned a useless piece of marinetism in their situation, was
especially disgusting; and he added, looking furiously ahead--''Tisn't
the boat I'd trim, I promise you: you--you ridiculous murderer!'

Just then Puddock's end of the boat touched a stone, or a post, or
something in the current, and that in which Cluffe sat came wheeling
swiftly round across the stream, and brought the gallant captain so near
the bank that, with a sudden jerk, he caught the end of a branch that
stretched far over the water, and, spite of the confounded tightness of
his toilet, with the energy of sheer terror, climbed a good way; but,
reaching a point where the branch forked, he could get no further,
though he tugged like a brick. But what was a fat fellow of fifty,
laced, and buckled, and buttoned up, like poor Cluffe--with his legs
higher up among the foliage than his head and body--to do, and with his
right calf caught in the fork of a branch, so as to arrest all progress,
and especially as the captain was plainly too much for the branch, which
was drooping toward the water, and emitting sounds premonitory of a
smash.

With a long, screaking crash the branch stooped down to the water, and,
so soon as the old element made itself acquainted with those parts that
reached it first, the gallant captain, with a sort of sob, redoubled his
efforts, and down came the faithless bough, more and more
perpendicularly, until his nicely got-up cue and bag, then his powdered
head, and finally Captain Cluffe's handsome features, went under the
surface. When this occurred, he instantaneously disengaged his legs with
a vague feeling that his last struggle above water was over.

His feet immediately touched the bottom; he stood erect, little above
his middle, and quite out of the main current, within half-a-dozen steps
of the bank, and he found himself--he scarcely knew how--on terra firma,
impounded in a little flower-garden, with lilacs and laburnums, and
sweet-briars, and, through a window close at hand, whom should he see
but Dangerfield, who was drying his hands in a towel; and, as Cluffe
stood for a moment, letting the water pour down through his sleeves, he
further saw him make some queer little arrangements, and eventually pour
out and swallow a glass of brandy, and was tempted to invoke his aid on
the spot; but some small incivilities which he had bestowed upon
Dangerfield, when he thought he cherished designs upon Aunt Rebecca,
forbade; and at that moment he spied the little wicket that opened upon
the road, and Dangerfield stept close up to the window, and cried
sternly, 'Who's there?' with his grim spectacles close to the window.

The boyish instinct of 'hide and seek' took possession of Cluffe, and he
glided forth from the precincts of the Brass Castle upon the high road,
just as the little hall-door was pushed open, and he heard the harsh
tones of Dangerfield challenging the gooseberry bushes and hollyhocks,
and thrashing the evergreens with his cane.

Cluffe hied straight to his lodgings, and ordered a sack posset. Worthy
Mrs. Mason eyed him in silent consternation, drenched and dishevelled,
wild, and discharging water from every part of his clothing and
decorations, as he presented himself without a hat, before her dim dipt
candle in the hall.

'I'll take that--that vessel, if you please, Sir, that's hanging about
your neck,' said the mild and affrighted lady, meaning Puddock's guitar,
through the circular orifice of which, under the chords, the water with
which it was filled occasionally splashed.

'Oh--eh?--the instrument?--confound it!' and rather sheepishly he got
the gray red and gold ribbon over his dripping head, and placing it in
her hand without explanation, he said--'A warming-pan as quickly as may
be, I beg, Mrs. Mason--and the posset, I do earnestly request. You
see--I--I've been nearly drowned--and--and I can't answer for
consequences if there be one minute's delay.

And up he went streaming, with Mrs. Mason's candle, to his bed-room, and
dragged off his clinging garments, and dried his fat body, like a man
coming out of a bath, and roared for hot water for his feet, and
bellowed for the posset and warming-pan, and rolled into his bed, and
kept the whole house in motion.

And so soon as he had swallowed his cordial, and toasted his sheets, and
with the aid of his man rolled himself in a great blanket, and clapped
his feet in a tub of hot water, and tumbled back again into his bed, he
bethought him of Puddock, and ordered his man to take his compliments to
Captain Burgh and Lieutenant Lillyman, the tenants of the nearest
lodging-house, and to request either to come to him forthwith on a
matter of life or death.

Lillyman was at home, and came.

'Puddock's drowned, my dear Lillyman, and I'm little better. The ferry
boat broke away with us. Do go down to the adjutant--they ought to raise
the salmon nets--I'm very ill myself--very ill, indeed--else I'd have
assisted; but you know me, Lillyman. Poor Puddock--'tis a sad
business--but lose no time.'

'And can't he swim?' asked Lillyman, aghast.

'Swim?--ay, like a stone, poor fellow! If he had only thrown himself
out, and held by me, hang it, I'd have brought him to shore; but poor
Puddock, he lost his head. And I--you see me here--don't forget to tell
them the condition you found me in, and--and--now don't lose a moment.'

So off went Lillyman to give the alarm at the barrack.










Dangerfield went up the river that morning with his rod and net, and his
piscatory fidus Achates, Irons, at his elbow. It was a nice gray sky,
but the clerk was unusually silent even for him; and the sardonic
piscator appeared inscrutably amused as he looked steadily upon the
running waters. Once or twice the spectacles turned full upon the clerk,
over Dangerfield's shoulder, with a cynical light, as if he were on the
point of making one of his ironical jokes; but he turned back again with
a little whisk, the jest untold, whatever it was, to the ripple and the
fly, and the coy gray troutlings.

At last, Dangerfield said over his shoulder, with the same amused look,
'Do you remember Charles Archer?'

Irons turned pale, and looked down embarrassed as it seemed, and began
plucking at a tangled piece of tackle, without making any answer.

'Hey? Irons,' persisted Dangerfield, who was not going to let him off.

'Yes, I do,' answered the man surlily; 'I remember him right well; but
I'd rather not, and I won't speak of him, that's all.'

'Well, Charles Archer's here, we've seen him, haven't we? and just the
devil he always was,' said Dangerfield with a deliberate chuckle of
infinite relish, and evidently enjoying the clerk's embarrassment as he
eyed him through his spectacles obliquely.

'He has seen you, too, he says; and thinks you have seen him,
hey?' and Dangerfield chuckled more and more knowingly, and watched his
shiftings and sulkings with a pleasant grin, as he teased and quizzed
him in his own enigmatical way.

'Well, supposing I did see him,' said Irons, looking up, returning
Dangerfield's comic glance with a bold and lowering stare; 'and
supposing he saw me, so long as we've no business one of another,
and never talks like, nor seems to remember--I think 'tisnt, no ways, no
one's business--that's what I say.'

'True, Irons, very true; you, I, and Sturk--the doctor I mean--are cool
fellows, and don't want for nerve; but I think, don't you? we're afraid
of Charles Archer, for all that.'

'Fear or no fear, I don't want to talk to him nor of him, no ways,'
replied the clerk, grimly, and looking as black as a thunder-cloud.

'Nor I neither, but you know he's here, and what a devil he is; and we
can't help it,' replied Dangerfield, very much tickled.

The clerk only looked through his nearly closed eyes, and with the same
pale and surly aspect toward the point to which Dangerfield's casting
line had floated, and observed--

'You'll lose them flies, Sir.'

'Hey?' said Dangerfield, and made another cast further into the stream.

'Whatever he may seem, and I think I know him pretty well,' he continued
in the same sprightly way, 'Charles Archer would dispose of each of
us--you understand--without a scruple, precisely when and how best
suited his convenience. Now doctor Sturk has sent him a message which I
know will provoke him, for it sounds like a threat. If he reads it so,
rely on't, he'll lay Sturk on his back, one way or another, and I'm
sorry for him, for I wished him well; but if he will play at brag with
the devil I can't help him.'

'I'm a man that holds his tongue; I never talks none, even in my liquor.
I'm a peaceable man, and no bully, and only wants to live quiet,' said
Irons in a hurry.

'A disciple of my school, you're right, Irons, that's my way; I
never name Charles except to the two or three who meet him, and then
only when I can't help it, just as you do; fellows of that kidney I
always take quietly, and I've prospered. Sturk would do well to
reconsider his message. Were I in his shoes, I would not eat an egg or
a gooseberry, or drink a glass of fair water from that stream, while he
was in the country, for fear of poison! curse him! and to think of
Sturk expecting to meet him, and walk with him, after such a message,
together, as you and I do here. Do you see that tree?'

It was a stout poplar, just a yard away from Irons's shoulder; and as
Dangerfield pronounced the word 'tree,' his hand rose, and the sharp
report of a pocket-pistol half-deafened Irons's ear.

'I say,' said Dangerfield, with a startling laugh, observing Irons
wince, and speaking as the puff of smoke crossed his face, 'he'd lodge a
bullet in the cur's heart, as suddenly as I've shot that tree;' the
bullet had hit the stem right in the centre, 'and swear he was going to
rob him.'

Irons eyed him with a livid squint, but answered nothing. I think he
acquiesced in Dangerfield's dreadful estimate of Charles Archer's
character.

'But we must give the devil his due; Charles can do a handsome thing
sometimes. You shall judge. It seems he saw you, and you him--here, in
this town, some months ago, and each knew the other, and you've seen him
since, and done likewise; but you said nothing, and he liked your
philosophy, and hopes you'll accept of this, which from its weight I
take to be a little rouleau of guineas.'

During this speech Irons seemed both angry and frightened, and looked
darkly enough before him on the water; and his lips were moving, as if
in a running commentary upon it all the while.

When Dangerfield put the little roll in his hand, Irons looked
suspicious and frightened, and balanced it in his palm, as if he had
thoughts of chucking it from him, as though it were literally a satanic
douceur. But it is hard to part with money, and Irons, though he still
looked cowed and unhappy, put the money into his breeches' pocket, and
he made a queer bow, and he said--

'You know, Sir, I never asked a farthing.'

'Ay, so he says,' answered Dangerfield.

'And,' with an imprecation, Irons added, 'I never expected to be a
shilling the better of him.'

'He knows it; and now you have the reason why I mentioned Charles
Archer; and having placed that gold in your hand, I've done with him,
and we sha'n't have occasion, I hope, to name his name for a good while
to come,' said Dangerfield.

Then came a long refreshing silence, while Dangerfield whipt the stream
with his flies. He was not successful; but he did not change his flies.
It did not seem to trouble him; indeed, mayhap he did not perceive it.
And after fully twenty minutes thus unprofitably employed, he suddenly
said, as if in continuation of his last sentence--

'And, respecting that money you'll use caution; a hundred guineas is not
always so honestly come by. Your wife drinks--suppose a relative in
England had left you that gold, by will, 'twould be best not to let
her know; but give it to Dr. Walsingham, secretly, to keep for you,
telling him the reason. He'll undertake the trust and tell no
one--that's your plan--mind ye.'

Then came another long silence, and Dangerfield applied himself in
earnest to catch some trout, and when he had accomplished half-a-dozen,
he tired altogether of the sport, and followed by Irons, he sauntered
homewards, where astounding news awaited him.





 STURK CAME HOME.


As Dangerfield, having parted company with Irons at the corner of the
bridge, was walking through the town, with his rod over his shoulder and
his basket of troutlings by his side, his attention was arrested by a
little knot of persons in close and earnest talk at the barrack-gate,
nearly opposite Sturk's house.

He distinguished at a glance the tall grim figure of Oliver Lowe, of
Lucan, the sternest and shrewdest magistrate who held the commission for
the county of Dublin in those days, mounted on his iron-gray hunter, and
holding the crupper with his right hand, as he leaned toward a ragged,
shaggy little urchin, with naked shins, whom he was questioning, as it
seemed closely. Half-a-dozen gaping villagers stood round.

There was an indescribable something about the group which indicated
horror and excitement. Dangerfield quickened his pace, and arrived just
as the adjutant rode out.

Saluting both as he advanced, Dangerfield asked--

'Nothing amiss, I hope, gentlemen?'

'The surgeon here's been found murdered in the park!' answered Lowe.

'Hey--Sturk?' said Dangerfield.

'Yes,' said the adjutant: 'this boy here says he's found him in the
Butcher's Wood.'

'The Butcher's Wood!--why, what the plague brought him there?'
exclaimed Dangerfield.

''Tis his straight road from Dublin across the park,' observed the
magistrate.

'Oh!--I thought 'twas the wood by Lord Mountjoy's,' said Dangerfield;
'and when did it happen?'

'Pooh!--some time between yesterday afternoon and half an hour ago,'
answered Mr. Lowe.

'Nothing known?' said Dangerfield. ''Twill be a sad hearing over the
way;' and he glared grimly with a little side-nod at the doctor's house.

Then he fell, like the others, to questioning the boy. He could tell
them but little--only the same story over and over. Coming out of town,
with tea and tobacco, a pair of shoes, and a bottle of whisky, for old
Mrs. Tresham--in the thick of the wood, among brambles, all at once he
lighted on the body. He could not mistake Dr. Sturk; he wore his
regimentals; there was blood about him; he did not touch him, nor go
nearer than a musket's length to him, and being frightened at the sight
in that lonely place he ran away and right down to the barrack, where
he made his report.

Just then out came Sergeant Bligh, with his men--two of them carrying a
bier with a mattress and cloaks thereupon. They formed, and accompanied
by the adjutant, at quick step marched through the town for the park.
Mr. Lowe accompanied them, and in the park-lane they picked up the
ubiquitous Doctor Toole, who joined the party.

Dangerfield walked a while beside the adjutant's horse; and, said he--

'I've had as much walking as I can well manage this morning, and you
don't want for hands, so I'll turn back when I've said just a word in
your ear. You know, Sir, funerals are expensive, and I happen to know
that poor Sturk was rather pressed for money--in fact, 'twas only the
day before yesterday I myself lent him a trifle. So will you, through
whatever channel you think best, let poor Mrs. Sturk know that she may
draw upon me for a hundred pounds, if she requires it?'

'Thank you, Mr. Dangerfield; I certainly shall.'

And so Dangerfield lifted his hat to the party and fell behind, and came
to a stand still, watching them till they disappeared over the brow of
the hill.

When he reached his little parlour in the Brass Castle, luncheon was
upon the table. But he had not much of an appetite, and stood at the
window, looking upon the river with his hands in his pockets, and a
strange pallid smile over his face, mingling with the light of the
silver spectacles.

'When Irons hears of this,' he said, 'he'll come to my estimate of
Charles Archer, and conclude he has had a finger in that pretty pie;
'twill frighten him.'

And somehow Dangerfield looked a little bit queer himself, and he drank
off two small glasses, such as folks then used in Ireland--of Nantz; and
setting down the glass, he mused--

'A queer battle life is; ha, ha! Sturk laid low--the wretched fool!
Widow--yes; children--ay. Charles! Charles! if there be a reckoning
after death, your score's an ugly one. I'm tired of playing my part in
this weary game of defence. Irons and I remain with the secret between
us. Glasscock had his fourth of it, and tasted death. Then we three had
it; and Sturk goes next; and now I and Irons--Irons and I--which goes
first?' And he fell to whistling slowly and dismally, with his hands in
his breeches' pockets, looking vacantly through his spectacles on the
ever-running water, an emblem of the eternal change and monotony of
life.

In the meantime the party, with Tim Brian, the bare-shanked urchin,
still in a pale perspiration, for guide, marched on, all looking ahead,
in suspense, and talking little.

On they marched, till they got into the bosky shadow of the close old
whitethorn and brambles, and there, in a lonely nook, the small birds
hopping on the twigs above, sure enough, on his back, in his
regimentals, lay the clay-coloured image of Sturk, some blood, nearly
black now, at the corners of his mouth, and under his stern brows a
streak of white eye-ball turned up to the sky.

There was a pool of blood under his pomatumed, powdered, and curled
head, more under his right arm, which was slightly extended, with the
open hand thrown palm upwards, as if appealing to heaven.

Toole examined him.

'No pulse, by Jove! Quiet there! don't stir!' Then he clapped his ear on
Sturk's white Marseilles vest.

'Hush!' and a long pause. Then Toole rose erect, but still on his knees,
'Will you be quiet there? I think there's some little action still;
only don't talk, or shift your feet; and just--just, do be quiet!'

Then Toole rose to his knees again, with a side glance fixed on the face
of Sturk, with a puzzled and alarmed look. He evidently did not well
know what to make of it. Then he slipped his hand within his vest, and
between his shirt and his skin.

'If he's dead, he's not long so. There's warmth here. And see, get me a
pinch or two of that thistle-down, d'ye see?'

And with the help of this improvised test he proceeded to try whether he
was still breathing. But there was a little air stirring, and they could
not manage it.

'Well!' said Toole, standing this time quite erect, 'I--I think there's
life there still. And now, boys, d'ye see? lift him very carefully, d'ye
mind? Gently, very gently, for I tell you, if this hÃ¦morrhage begins
again, he'll not last twenty seconds.'

So on a cloak they lifted him softly and deftly to the bier, and laid
covering over him; and having received Toole's last injunctions, and
especially a direction to Mrs. Sturk to place him in a well-warmed bed,
and introduce a few spoonfuls of warm port wine negus into his mouth,
and if he swallowed, to continue to administer it from time to time,
Sergeant Bligh and his men commenced their funereal march toward Sturk's
house.

'And now, Mr. Adjutant,' said Lowe, 'had not we best examine the ground,
and make a search for anything that may lead to a conviction?'

Well, a ticket was found trod into the bloody mud, scarcely legible, and
Sturk's cocked hat, the leaf and crown cut through with a blow of some
blunt instrument. His sword they had found by his side not drawn.

'See! here's a foot-print, too,' said Lowe; 'don't move!'

It was remarkable. They pinned together the backs of two letters, and
Toole, with his surgical scissors, cut the pattern to fit exactly into
the impression; and he and Lowe, with great care, pencilled in the
well-defined marks of the great hob-nails, and a sort of seam or scar
across the heel.

[Illustration: Footprint.]

'Twas pretty much after this fashion. It was in a slight dip in the
ground where the soil continued soft. They found it in two other places
coming up to the fatal spot, from the direction of the Magazine. And it
was traceable on for some twenty yards more faintly; then, again, very
distinctly, where--a sort of ditch interposing--a jump had been made,
and here it turned down towards the park wall and the Chapelizod road,
still, however, slanting in the Dublin direction.

In the hollow by the park wall it appeared again, distinctly; and here
it was plain the transit of the wall had been made, for the traces of
the mud were evident enough upon its surface, and the mortar at top was
displaced, and a little tuft of grass in the mud, left by the clodded
shoesole. Here the fellow had got over.

They followed, and, despairing of finding it upon the road, they
diverged into the narrow slip of ground by the river bank, and just
within the park-gate, in a slight hollow, the clay of which was still
impressible, they found the track again. It led close up to the river
bank, and there the villain seemed to have come to a stand still; for
the sod just for so much as a good sized sheet of letter-paper might
cover, was trod and broken, as if at the water's edge he had stood for a
while, and turned about and shifted his feet, like a fellow that is
uneasy while he is stationary.

From this stand-point they failed to discover any receding foot-print;
but close by it came a little horse track, covered with shingle, by
which, in those days, the troops used to ride their horses to water. He
might have stepped upon this, and following it, taken to the streets; or
he might--and this was Lowe's theory--have swam the river at this point,
and got into some of those ruffian haunts in the rear of Watling and St.
James's streets. So Lowe, who, with a thief or a murderer in the wind,
had the soul of a Nimrod, rode round to the opposite bank, first telling
Toole, who did not care to press his services at Sturk's house,
uninvited, that he would send out the great Doctor Pell to examine the
patient, or the body, as the case might turn out.

By this time they were carrying Doctor Sturk--that gaudy and dismal
image--up his own staircase--his pale wife sobbing and shivering on the
landing, among whispered ejaculations from the maids, and the speechless
wonder of the awe-stricken children, staring through the banisters--to
lay him in the bed where at last he is to lie without dreaming.





 TOOLE, IN DIFFERENT SCENES,
PROVE THEMSELVES GOOD SAMARITANS; AND THE GREAT DOCTOR PELL MOUNTS THE
STAIRS OF THE HOUSE BY THE CHURCH-YARD.


So pulse or no pulse, dead or alive, they got Sturk into his bed.

Poor, cowed, quiet little Mrs. Sturk, went quite wild at the bedside.

'Oh! my Barney--my Barney--my noble Barney,' she kept crying. 'He's
gone--he'll never speak again. Do you think he hears? Oh, Barney, my
darling--Barney, it's your own poor little Letty--oh--Barney, darling,
don't you hear. It's your own poor, foolish Letty.'

But it was the same stern face, and ears of stone. There was no answer
and no sign.

And she sent a pitiful entreaty to Doctor Toole, who came very
good-naturedly--and indeed he was prowling about the doorway of his
domicile in expectation of the summons. And he shook her very cordially
by the hand, and quite 'filled-up,' at her woebegone appeal, and told
her she must not despair yet.

And this time he pronounced most positively that Sturk was still living.

'Yes, my dear Madam, so sure as you and I are. There's no mistaking.'

And as the warmth of the bed began to tell, the signs of life showed
themselves more and more unequivocally. But Toole knew that his patient
was in a state of coma, from which he had no hope of his emerging.

So poor little Mrs. Sturk--as white as the plaster on the wall--who kept
her imploring eyes fixed on the doctor's ruddy countenance, during his
moments of deliberation, burst out into a flood of tears, and
thanksgivings, and benedictions.

'He'll recover--something tells me he'll recover. Oh! my
Barney--darling--you will--you will.'

'While there's life--you know--my dear Ma'am,', said Toole, doing his
best. 'But then--you see--he's been very badly abused about the head;
and the brain you know--is the great centre--the--the--but, as I said,
while there's life, there's hope.'

'And he's so strong--he shakes off an illness so easily; he has such
courage.'

'So much the better, Ma'am.'

'And I can't but think, as he did not die outright, and has shown such
wonderful endurance. Oh! my darling, he'll get on.'

'Well, well, Ma'am, there certainly have been wonderful recoveries.'

'And he's so much better already, you see, and I know so well how he
gets through an illness, 'tis wonderful, and he certainly is mightily
improved since we got him to bed. Why, I can see him breathe now, and
you know it must be a good sign; and then there's a merciful God over
us--and all the poor little children--what would become of us?' And then
she wiped her eyes quickly. 'The promise, you know, of length of
days--it often comforted me before--to those that honour father and
mother; and I believe there never was so good a son. Oh! my noble
Barney, never; 'tis my want of reliance and trust in the Almighty's
goodness.'

And so, holding Toole by the cuff of his coat, and looking piteously
into his face as they stood together in the doorway, the poor little
woman argued thus with inexorable death.

Fools, and blind; when amidst our agonies of supplication the blow
descends, our faith in prayer is staggered, as if it reached not the ear
of the Allwise, and moved not His sublime compassion. Are we quite sure
that we comprehend the awful and far-sighted game that is being played
for us and others so well that we can sit by and safely dictate its
moves?

How will Messrs. Morphy or Staunton, on whose calculations, I will
suppose, you have staked Â£100, brook your insane solicitations to spare
this pawn or withdraw that knight from prise, on the board which is but
the toy type of that dread field where all the powers of eternal
intellect, the wisdom from above and the wisdom from beneath--the
stupendous intelligence that made, and the stupendous sagacity that
would undo us, are pitted one against the other in a death-combat, which
admits of no reconciliation and no compromise?

About poor Mrs. Nutter's illness, and the causes of it, various stories
were current in Chapelizod. Some had heard it was a Blackamoor witch who
had evoked the foul fiend in bodily shape from the parlour cupboard, and
that he had with his cloven foot kicked her and Sally Nutter round the
apartment until then screams brought in Charles Nutter, who was smoking
in the garden; and that on entering, he would have fared as badly as the
rest, had he not had presence of mind to pounce at once upon the great
family Bible that lay on the window-sill, with which he belaboured the
infernal intruder to a purpose. Others reported 'twas the ghost of old
Philip Nutter, who rose through the floor, and talked I know not what
awful rhodomontade. These were the confabulations of the tap-room and
the kitchen; but the speculations and rumours current over the
card-table and claret glasses were hardly more congruous or
intelligible. In fact, nobody knew well what to make of it. Nutter
certainly had disappeared, and there was an uneasy feeling about him.
The sinister terms on which he and Sturk had stood were quite well
known, and though nobody spoke out, every one knew pretty well what his
neighbour was thinking of.

Our blooming friend, the handsome and stalworth Magnolia, having got a
confidential hint from agitated Mrs. Mack, trudged up to the mills, in a
fine frenzy, vowing vengeance on Mary Matchwell, for she liked poor
Sally Nutter well. And when, with all her roses in her cheeks, and her
saucy black eyes flashing vain lightnings across the room in pursuit of
the vanished woman in sable, the Amazon with black hair and slender
waist comforted and pitied poor Sally, and anathematised her cowardly
foe, it must be confessed she looked plaguy handsome, wicked, and
good-natured.

'Mary Matchwell, indeed! I'll match her well, wait a while, you'll see
if I don't. I'll pay her off yet, never mind, Sally, darling. Arrah!
Don't be crying, child, do you hear me. What's that? Charles? Why,
then, is it about Charles you're crying? Charles Nutter? Phiat! woman
dear! don't you think he's come to an age to take care of himself? I'll
hold you a crown he's in Dublin with the sheriff, going to cart that
jade to Bridewell. And why in the world didn't you send for me, when
you wanted to discourse with Mary Matchwell? Where was the good of my
poor dear mother? Why, she's as soft as butter. 'Twas a devil like me
you wanted, you poor little darling. Do you think I'd a let her frighten
you this way--the vixen--I'd a knocked her through the window as soon as
look at her. She saw with half an eye she could frighten you both, you
poor things. Oh! ho! how I wish I was here. I'd a put her across my knee
and--no--do you say? Pooh! you don't know me, you poor innocent little
creature; and, do ye mind now, you must not be moping here. Sally
Nutter, all alone, you'll just come down to us, and drink a cup of tea
and play a round game and hear the news; and look up now and give me a
kiss, for I like you, Sally, you kind old girl.'

And she gave her a hug, and a shake, and half-a-dozen kisses on each
cheek, and laughed merrily, and scolded and kissed her again.

Little more than an hour after, up comes a little billet from the
good-natured Magnolia, just to help poor little Sally Nutter out of the
vapours, and vowing that no excuse should stand good, and that come she
must to tea and cards. 'And, oh! what do you think?' it went on. 'Such a
bit a newse, I'm going to tell you, so prepare for a chock;' at this
part poor Sally felt quite sick, but went on. 'Doctor Sturk, that droav
into town Yesterday, as grand as you Please, in Mrs. Strafford's coach,
all smiles and Polightness--whood a bleeved! Well He's just come back,
with two great Fractions of his skull, riding on a Bear, insensible into
The town--there's for you. Only Think of poor Mrs. Sturk, and the Chock
she's got on sight of Him: and how thankful and Pleasant you should be
that Charles Nutter is not a Corpes in the Buchar's wood, and jiggin
Home to you like Sturk did. But well in health, what I'm certain shure
he is, taken the law of Mary Matchwell--bless the Mark--to get her
emprisind and Publickly wiped by the commin hangman.' All which rhapsody
conjured up a confused and dyspeptic dream, full of absurd and terrific
images, which she could not well comprehend, except in so far as it
seemed clear that some signal disaster had befallen Sturk.

That night, at nine o'clock, the great Doctor Pell arrived in his coach,
with steaming horses, at Sturk's hall-door, where the footman thundered
a tattoo that might have roused the dead; for it was the family's
business, if they did not want a noise, to muffle the knocker. And the
doctor strode up, directed by the whispering awestruck maid, to Sturk's
bed-chamber, with his hands in his muff, after the manner of doctors in
his day, without asking questions, or hesitating on lobbies, for the
sands of his minutes ran out in gold-dust. So, with a sort of awe and
suppressed bustle preceding and following him, he glided up stairs and
straight to the patient's bedside, serene, saturnine, and rapid.

In a twinkling the maid was running down the street for Toole, who had
kept at home, in state costume, expecting the consultation with the
great man, which he liked. And up came Toole, with his brows knit, and
his chin high, marching over the pavement in a mighty fuss, for he knew
that the oracle's time and temper were not to be trifled with.

In the club, Larry the drawer, as he set a pint of mulled claret by old
Arthur Slowe's elbow, whispered something in his ear, with a solemn
wink.

'Ho!--by Jove, gentlemen, the doctor's come--Doctor Pell. His coach
stands at Sturk's door, Larry says, and we'll soon hear how he fares.'
And up got Major O'Neill with a 'hey! ho--ho!' and out he went, followed
by old Slowe, with his little tankard in his fist, to the inn-door,
where the major looked on the carriage, lighted up by the footman's
flambeau, beneath the old village elm--up the street--smoking his pipe
still to keep it burning, and communicating with Slowe, two words at a
time. And Slowe stood gazing at the same object with his little faded
blue eyes, his disengaged hand in his breeches' pocket, and ever and
anon wetting his lips with his hot cordial, and assenting agreeably to
the major's conclusions.

'Seize ace! curse it!' cried Cluffe, who, I'm happy to say, had taken no
harm by his last night's wetting; 'another gammon, I'll lay you fifty.'

'Toole, I dare thay, will look in and tell us how poor Sturk goes on,'
said Puddock, playing his throw.

'Hang it, Puddock, mind your game--to be sure, he will. Cinque ace!
well, curse it! the same throw over again! 'Tis too bad. I missed
taking you last time, with that stupid blot you've covered--and now, by
Jove, it ruins me. There's no playing when fellows are getting up every
minute to gape after doctors' coaches, and leaving the door open--hang
it, I've lost the game by it--gammoned twice already. 'Tis very
pleasant. I only wish when gentlemen interrupt play, they'd be good
enough to pay the bets.'

It was not much, about five shillings altogether, and little Puddock had
not often a run of luck.

'If you'd like to win it back, Captain Cluffe, I'll give you a chance,'
said O'Flaherty, who was tolerably sober. 'I'll lay you an even guinea
Sturk's dead before nine to-morrow morning; and two to one he's dead
before this time to-morrow night.'

'I thank you--no, Sir--two doctors over him, and his head in two
pieces--you're very obliging, lieutenant, but I'll choose a likelier
wager,' said Cluffe.

Dangerfield, who was overlooking the party, with his back to the fire,
appeared displeased at their levity--shook his head, and was on the
point of speaking one of those polite but cynical reproofs, whose irony,
cold and intangible, intimidated the less potent spirits of the
club-room. But he dismissed it with a little shrug. And a minute after,
Major O'Neill and Arthur Slowe became aware that Dangerfield had glided
behind them, and was looking serenely, like themselves, at the Dublin
doctor's carriage and smoking team. The light from Sturk's bed-room
window, and the red glare of the footman's torch, made two little
trembling reflections in the silver spectacles as he stood in the shade,
peering movelessly over their shoulders.

''Tis a sorry business, gentlemen,' he said in a stern, subdued tone.
'Seven children and a widow. He's not dead yet, though: whatever Toole
might do, the Dublin doctor would not stay with a dead man; time's
precious. I can't describe how I pity that poor soul, his wife--what's
to become of her and her helpless brood I know not.'

Slowe grunted a dismal assent, and the major, with a dolorous gaze, blew
a thin stream of tobacco-smoke into the night air, which floated off
like the ghost of a sigh towards the glimmering window of Sturk's
bed-room. So they all grew silent. It seemed they had no more to say,
and that, in their minds, the dark curtain had come down upon the drama
of which the 'noble Barney,' as poor Mrs. Sturk called him, was hero.





 TOOLE, IN FULL COSTUME, STANDS UPON THE HEARTH-STONE OF THE
CLUB, AND ILLUMINATES THE COMPANY WITH HIS BACK TO THE FIRE.


Two or three minutes later, the hall-door of Sturk's mansion opened
wide, and the figure of the renowned doctor from Dublin, lighted up with
a candle from behind, and with the link from before, glided swiftly down
the steps, and disappeared into the coach with a sharp clang of the
door. Up jumps the footman, and gives his link a great whirl about his
head. The maid stands on the step with her hand before the flaring
candle. 'The Turk's Head, in Werburgh Street,' shouts the footman, and
smack goes the coachman's whip, and the clang and rattle begin.

'That's Alderman Blunkett--he's dying,' said the major, by way of gloss
on the footman's text; and away went the carriage with thundering
wheels, and trailing sparks behind it, as if the wild huntsman had
furnished its fleet and shadowy team.

'He has ten guineas in his pocket for that--a guinea a minute, by Jove,
coining, no less,' said the major, whose pipe was out, and he thinking
of going in to replenish it. 'We'll have Toole here presently, depend
upon it.'

He had hardly spoken when Toole, in a halo of candle-light, emerged from
Sturk's hall-door. With one foot on the steps, the doctor paused to give
a parting direction about chicken-broth and white-wine whey.

These last injunctions on the door-steps had begun, perhaps in a
willingness to let folk see and even hear that the visit was
professional; and along with the lowering and awfully serious
countenance with which they were delivered, had grown into a habit, so
that, as now, he practised them even in solitude and darkness.

Then Toole was seen to approach the Phoenix, in full blow, his cane
under his arm. With his full-dressed wig on, he was always grand and
Ãsculapian, and reserved withal, and walked with a measured tread, and a
sad and important countenance, which somehow made him look more chubby;
and he was a good deal more formal with his friends at the inn-door, and
took snuff before he answered them. But this only lasted some eight or
ten minutes after a consultation or momentous visit, and would melt away
insensibly in the glow of the club-parlour, sometimes reviving for a
minute, when the little mirror that sloped forward from the wall, showed
him a passing portrait of his grand wig and toggery. And it was pleasant
to observe how the old fellows unconsciously deferred to this temporary
self-assertion, and would call him, not Tom, nor Toole, but 'doctor,' or
'Doctor Toole,' when the fit was upon him.

And Devereux, in his day, won two or three wagers by naming the doctor
with whom Toole had been closeted, reading the secret in the countenance
and by-play of their crony. When it had been with tall, cold, stately
Dr. Pell, Toole was ceremonious and deliberate, and oppressively polite.
On the other hand, when he had been shut up with brusque, half-savage,
energetic Doctor Rogerson, Tom was laconic, decisive, and insupportably
ill-bred, till, as we have said, the mirage melted away, and he
gradually acquiesced in his identity. Then, little by little, the
irrepressible gossip, jocularity, and ballad minstrelsy were heard
again, his little eyes danced, and his waggish smiles glowed once more,
ruddy as a setting sun, through the nectarian vapours of the punch-bowl.
The ghosts of Pell and Rogerson fled to their cold dismal shades, and
little Tom Toole was his old self again for a month to come.

'Your most obedient, gentlemen--your most obedient,' said Toole, bowing
and taking their hands graciously in the hall--'a darkish evening,
gentlemen.'

'And how does your patient, doctor?' enquired Major O'Neil.

The doctor closed his eyes, and shook his head slowly, with a gentle
shrug.

'He's in a bad case, major. There's little to be said, and that little,
Sir, not told in a moment,' answered Toole, and took snuff.

'How's Sturk, Sir?' repeated the silver spectacles, a little sternly.

'Well, Sir, he's not dead; but, by your leave, had we not better go
into the parlour, eh?--'tis a little chill, and, as I said, 'tis not all
told in a moment--he's not dead, though, that's the sum of it--you
first, pray proceed, gentlemen.'

Dangerfield grimly took him at his word; but the polite major got up a
little ceremonious tussle with Toole in the hall. However, it was no
more than a matter of half-a-dozen bows and waves of the hand, and
'after you, Sir;' and Toole entered, and after a general salutation in
the style of Doctor Pell, he established himself upon the hearth-stone,
with his back to the fire, as a legitimate oracle.

Toole was learned, as he loved to be among the laity on such occasions,
and was in no undue haste to bring his narrative to a close. But the
gist of the matter was this--Sturk was labouring under concussion of the
brain, and two terrific fractures of the skull--so long, and lying so
near together, that he and Doctor Pell instantly saw 'twould be
impracticable to apply the trepan, in fact that 'twould be certain and
instantaneous death. He was absolutely insensible, but his throat was
not yet palsied, and he could swallow a spoonful of broth or sack whey
from time to time. But he was a dead man to all intents and purposes.
Inflammation might set in at any moment; at best he would soon begin to
sink, and neither he nor Doctor Pell thought he had the smallest chance
of awaking from his lethargy for one moment. He might last two or three
days, or even a week--what did it signify?--what was he better than a
corpse already? He could never hear, see, speak, or think again; and for
any difference it could possibly make to poor Sturk, they might clap him
in his grave and cover him up to-night.

Then the talk turned upon Nutter. Every man had his theory or his
conjecture but Dangerfield, who maintained a discreet reserve, much to
the chagrin of the others, who thought, not without reason, that he knew
more about the state of his affairs, and especially of his relations
with Lord Castlemallard, than perhaps all the world beside.

'Possibly, poor fellow, he was not in a condition to have his accounts
overhauled, and on changing an agency things sometimes come out that
otherwise might have kept quiet. He was the sort of fellow who would go
through with a thing; and if he thought the best way on going out of the
agency was to go out of the world also, out he'd go. They were always a
resolute family--Nutter's great uncle, you know, drowned himself in that
little lake--what do you call it?--in the county of Cavan, and 'twas
mighty coolly and resolutely done too.'

But there was a haunting undivulged suspicion in the minds of each.
Every man knew what his neighbour was thinking of, though he did not
care to ask about his ugly dreams, or to relate his own. They all knew
what sort of terms Sturk and Nutter had been on. They tried to put the
thought away, for though Nutter was not a joker, nor a songster, nor a
story-teller, yet they liked him. Besides, Nutter might possibly turn up
in a day or two, and in that case 'twould go best with those who had not
risked an atrocious conjecture about him in public. So every man waited,
and held his tongue upon that point till his neighbour should begin.






 TOOLE AND MR. LOWE MAKE A VISIT AT THE MILLS, AND RECOGNISE
SOMETHING REMARKABLE WHILE THERE.


After church, Dr. Toole walking up to the Mills, to pay an afternoon
visit to poor little Mrs. Nutter, was overtaken by Mr. Lowe, the
magistrate who brought his tall, iron-gray hunter to a walk as he
reached him.

'Any tidings of Nutter?' asked he, after they had, in the old world
phrase, given one another the time of day.

'Not a word,' said the doctor; 'I don't know what to make of it; but you
know what's thought. The last place he was seen in was his own garden.
The river was plaguy swollen Friday night, and just where he stood it's
deep enough, I can tell you; often I bathed there when I was a boy. He
was consumedly in the dumps, poor fellow; and between ourselves, he was
a resolute dog, and atrabilious, and just the fellow to make the jump
into kingdom-come if the maggot bit: and you know his hat was fished out
of the river a long way down. They dragged next morning,
but--pish!--'twas all nonsense and moonshine; why, there was water
enough to carry him to Ringsend in an hour. He was a good deal out of
sorts, as I said, latterly--a shabby design, Sir, to thrust him out of
my Lord Castlemallard's agency; but that's past and gone; and, besides,
I have reason to know there was some kind of an excitement--a quarrel it
could not be--poor Sally Nutter's too mild and quiet for that; but
a--a--something--a--an--agitation--or a bad news--or something--just
before he went out; and so, poor Nutter, you see, it looks very like as
if he had done something rash.'

Talking thus, they reached the Mills by the river side, not far from
Knockmaroon.

On learning that Toole was about making a call there, Lowe gave his
bridle to a little Chapelizod ragamuffin, and, dismounting, accompanied
the doctor. Mrs. Nutter was in her bed.

'Make my service to your mistress,' said Toole, 'and say I'll look in on
her in five minutes, if she'll admit me.' And Lowe and the doctor walked
on to the garden, and so side by side down to the river's bank.

'Hey!--look at that,' said Toole, with a start, in a hard whisper; and
he squeezed Lowe's arm very hard, and looked as if he saw a snake.

It was the impression in the mud of the same peculiar foot-print they
had tracked so far in the park. There was a considerable pause, during
which Lowe stooped down to examine the details of the footmark.

'Hang it--you know--poor Mrs. Nutter--eh?' said Toole, and hesitated.

'We must make a note of that--the thing's important,' said Mr. Lowe,
sternly fixing his gray eye upon Toole.

'Certainly, Sir,' said the doctor, bridling; 'I should not like to be
the man to hit him--you know; but it is remarkable--and, curse it,
Sir, if called on, I'll speak the truth as straight as you, Sir--every
bit, Sir.'

And he added an oath, and looked very red and heated.

The magistrate opened his pocket-book, took forth the pattern sole,
carefully superimposed it, called Toole's attention, and said--

'You see.'

Toole nodded hurriedly; and just then the maid came out to ask him to
see her mistress.

'I say, my good woman,' said Lowe; 'just look here. Whose foot-print is
that--do you know it?'

'Oh, why, to be sure I do. Isn't it the master's brogues?' she replied,
frightened, she knew not why, after the custom of her kind.

'You observe that?' and he pointed specially to the transverse line
across the heel. 'Do you know that?'

The woman assented.

'Who made or mended these shoes?'

'Bill Heaney, the shoemaker, down in Martin's-row, there--'twas he made
them, and mended them, too, Sir.'

So he came to a perfect identification, and then an authentication of
his paper pattern; then she could say they were certainly the shoes he
wore on Friday night--in fact, every other pair he had were then on the
shoe-stand on the lobby. So Lowe entered the house, and got pen and ink,
and continued to question the maid and make little notes; and the other
maid knocked at the parlour door with a message to Toole.

Lowe urged his going; and somehow Toole thought the magistrate suspected
him of making signs to his witness, and he departed ill at ease; and at
the foot of the stairs he said to the woman--

'You had better go in there--that stupid Lynn is doing her best to hang
your master, by Jove!'

And the woman cried--

'Oh, dear, bless us!'

Toole was stunned and agitated, and so with his hand on the clumsy
banister he strode up the dark staircase, and round the little corner in
the lobby, to Mrs. Nutter's door.

'Oh, Madam, 'twill all come right, be sure,' said Toole, uncomfortably,
responding to a vehement and rambling appeal of poor Mrs. Nutter's.

'And do you really think it will? Oh, doctor, doctor, do you think
it will? The last two or three nights and days--how many is it?--oh, my
poor head--it seems like a month since he went away.'

'And where do you think he is? Do you think it's business?'

'Of course 'tis business, Ma'am.'

'And--and--oh, doctor!--you really think he's safe?'

'Of course, Madam, he's safe--what's to ail him?'

And Toole rummaged amongst the old medicine phials on the chimneypiece,
turning their labels round and round, but neither seeing them nor
thinking about them, and only muttering to himself with, I'm sorry to
say, a curse here and there.

'You see, my dear Ma'am, you must keep yourself as quiet as you can, or
physic's thrown away upon you; you really must,' said Toole.

'But doctor,' pleaded the poor lady, 'you don't know--I--I'm
terrified--I--I--I'll never be the same again,' and she burst into
hysterical crying.

'Now, really, Madam--confound it--my dear, good lady--you see--this will
never do'--he was uncorking and smelling at the bottles in search of
'the drops'--'and--and--here they are--and isn't it better, Ma'am, you
should be well and hearty--here drink this--when--when he comes
back--don't you see--than--a--a--'

'But--oh, I wish I could tell you. She said--she said--the--the--oh, you
don't know--'

'She--who? Who said what?' cried Toole, lending his ear, for he
never refused a story.

'Oh! Doctor, he's gone--I'll never--never--I know I'll never see him
again. Tell me he's not gone--tell me I'll see him again.'

'Hang it, can't she stick to one thing at a time--the poor woman's half
out of her wits,' said Toole, provoked; 'I'll wager a dozen of claret
there's more on her mind than she's told to anyone.'

Before he could bring her round to the subject again, the doctor was
called down to Lowe; so he took his leave for the present; and after his
talk with the magistrate, he did not care to go up again to poor little
Mrs. Nutter; and Moggy was as white as ashes standing by, for Mr. Lowe
had just made her swear to her little story about the shoes; and Toole
walked home to the village with a heavy heart, and a good deal out of
humour.

Toole knew that a warrant would be issued next day against Nutter. The
case against him was black enough. Still, even supposing he had struck
those trenchant blows over Sturk's head, it did not follow that it was
without provocation or in cold blood. It looked, however, altogether so
unpromising, that he would have been almost relieved to hear that
Nutter's body had been found drowned in the river.

Still there was a chance that he made good his retreat. If he had not
paid his fare in Charon's packet-boat, he might, at least, have crossed
the channel in the Trevor or Hillsborough to Holyhead. Then, deuce
was in it, if he did not make a fair run for it, and earth himself
snugly somewhere. 'Twas lighter work then than now. 'The old saying at
London, among servants,' writes that good-natured theatrical wag, Tate
Wilkinson, 'was, "I wish you were at York!" which the wronged cook has
now changed for, "I wish you were at Jamaica." Scotland was then
imagined by the cockney as a dreary place, distant almost as the West
Indies; now'(reader, pray note the marvel) 'an agreeable party may,
with the utmost ease, dine early in the week in Grosvenor Square, and
without discomposure set down at table on Saturday or Sunday in the new
town of Edinburgh!' From which we learn that miracles of celerity were
already accomplishing themselves, and that the existing generation
contemplated their triumphs complacently. But even upon these we have
improved, and nowadays, our whole social organisation is subservient to
detection. Cut your telegraph wires, substitute sail boats for steam,
and your old fair and easy forty-miles-a-day stage-coaches for the train
and the rail, disband your City police and detective organisation, and
make the transit of a letter between London and Dublin a matter of from
five days to nearly as many weeks, and compute how much easier it was
then than now for an adventurous highwayman, an absconding debtor, or a
pair of fugitive lovers, to make good their retreat. Slow, undoubtedly,
was the flight--they did not run, they walked away; but so was pursuit,
and altogether, without authentic lights and official helps--a matter of
post-chaises and perplexity, cross-roads and rumour, foundering in a
wild waste of conjecture, or swallowed in the quag of some country
inn-yard, where nothing was to be heard, and out of which there would be
no relay of posters to pull you until nine o'clock next morning.

As Toole debouched from Martin's-row, on his return, into the
comparative amplitude of the main street of Chapelizod, he glanced
curiously up to Sturk's bed-room windows. There were none of the white
signals of death there. So he ascended the door step, and paid a
visit--of curiosity, I must say--and looked on the snorting image of his
old foe, and the bandaged head, spell-bound and dreamless, that had
machinated so much busy mischief against his own medical sovereignty and
the rural administration of Nutter.

As Toole touched his pulse, and saw him swallow a spoonful of chicken
broth, and parried poor Mrs. Sturk's eager quivering pleadings for his
life with kind though cautious evasions, he rightly judged that the
figure that lay there was more than half in the land of ghosts
already--that the enchanter who met him in the Butcher's Wood, and whose
wand had traced those parallel indentures in his skull, had not only
exorcised for ever the unquiet spirit of intrigue, but wound up the tale
of his days. It was true that he was never more to step from that bed,
and that his little children would, ere many days, be brought there by
kindly, horror-loving maids, to look their last on 'the poor master,'
and kiss awfully his cold stern mouth before the coffin lid was screwed
down, and the white-robed image of their father hidden away for ever
from their sight.












Devereux, wrapped in his cloak, strode into the park, through
Parson's-gate, up the steep hill, and turned towards Castleknock and the
furze and hawthorn wood that interposes. The wide plain spread before
him in solitude, with the thin vapours of night, lying over it like a
film in the moonlight.

Two or three thorn trees stood out from the rest, a pale and solitary
group, stooping eastward with the prevailing sweep of a hundred years or
more of westerly winds. To this the gipsy captain glided, in a straight
military line, his eye searching the distance; and, after a while, from
the skirts of the wood, there moved to meet him a lonely female figure,
with her light clothing fluttering in the cold air. At first she came
hurriedly, but as they drew near, she came more slowly.

Devereux was angry, and, like an angry man, he broke out first with--

'So, your servant, Mistress Nan! Pretty lies you've been telling of
me--you and your shrew of a mother. You thought you might go to the
rector and say what you pleased, and I hear nothing.'

Nan Glynn was undefinably aware that he was very angry, and had
hesitated and stood still before he began, and now she said
imploringly--

'Sure, Masther Richard, it wasn't me.'

'Come, my lady, don't tell me. You and your mother--curse her!--went to
the Elms in my absence--you and she--and said I had promised to
marry you! There--yes or no. Didn't you? And could you or could she
have uttered a more utterly damnable lie?'

''Twas she, Master Richard--troth an' faith. I never knew she was
going to say the like--no more I didn't.'

'A likely story, truly, Miss Nan!' said the young rake, bitterly.

'Oh! Masther Richard! by this cross!--you won't believe me--'tis as true
as you're standin' there--until she said it to Miss Lily--'

'Hold your tongue!' cried Devereux, so fiercely, that she thought him
half wild; 'do you think 'tis a pin's point to me which of you first
coined or uttered the lie? Listen to me; I'm a desperate man, and I'll
take a course with you both you'll not like, unless you go to-morrow and
see Dr. Walsingham yourself, and tell him the whole truth--yes, the
truth--what the devil do I care?--speak that, and make the most of it.
But tell him plainly that your story about my having promised to marry
you--do you hear--was a lie, from first to last--a lie--a lie--without
so much as a grain of truth mixed up in it. All a cursed--devil's--woman's
invention. Now, mind ye, Miss Nan, if you don't, I'll bring you and your
mother into court, or I'll have the truth out of you.'

'But there's no need to threaten, sure, you know, Masther Richard, I'd
do anything for you--I would. I'd beg, or I'd rob, or I'd die for you,
Masther Richard; and whatever you bid me, your poor wild Nan 'ill do.'

Devereux was touched, the tears were streaming down her pale cheeks, and
she was shivering.

'You're cold, Nan; where's your cloak and riding hood?' he said, gently.

'I had to part them, Masther Richard.'

'You want money, Nan,' he said, and his heart smote him.

'I'm not cold when I'm near you, Masther Richard. I'd wait the whole
night long for a chance of seeing you; but oh! ho--(she was crying as if
her heart would break, looking in his face, and with her hands just a
little stretched towards him), oh, Masther Richard, I'm nothing to you
now--your poor wild Nan!'

Poor thing! Her mother had not given her the best education. I believe
she was a bit of a thief, and she could tell fibs with fluency and
precision. The woman was a sinner; but her wild, strong affections were
true, and her heart was not in pelf.

'Now, don't cry--where's the good of crying--listen to me,' said
Devereux.

'Sure I heerd you were sick, last week, Masther Richard,' she went on,
not heeding, and with her cold fingers just touching his arm
timidly--and the moon glittered on the tears that streamed down her poor
imploring cheeks--'an' I'd like to be caring you; an' I think you look
bad, Masther Richard.'

'No, Nan--I tell you, no--I'm very well, only poor, just now, Nan, or
you should not want.'

'Sure I know, Masther Richard: it is not that. I know you'd be good to
me if you had it: and it does not trouble me.'

'But see, Nan, you must speak to your friends, and say--'

'Sorra a friend I have--sorra a friend, Masther Richard; and I did not
spake to the priest this year or more, and I darn't go near him,' said
the poor Palmerstown lass that was once so merry.

'Why won't you listen to me, child? I won't have you this way. You must
have your cloak and hood. 'Tis very cold; and, by Heavens, Nan, you
shall never want while I have a guinea. But you see I'm poor now, curse
it--I'm poor--I'm sorry, Nan, and I have only this one about me.'

'Oh, no, Masther Richard, keep it--maybe you'd want it yourself.'

'No, child, don't vex me--there--I'll have money in a week or two, and
I'll send you some more, Nan--I'll not forget you.' He said this in a
sadder tone; 'and, Nan, I'm a changed man. All's over, you know, and
we'll see one another no more. You'll be happier, Nan, for the parting,
so here, and now, Nan, we'll say good-bye.'

'Oh! no--no--no--not good-bye; you couldn't--couldn't--couldn't--your
poor wild Nan.'

And she clung to his cloak, sobbing in wild supplication.

'Yes, Nan, good-bye, it must be--no other word.'

'An' oh, Masther Richard, is it in airnest? You wouldn't, oh! sure you
wouldn't.'

'Now, Nan, there's a good girl; I must go. Remember your promise, and
I'll not forget you, Nan--on my soul, I won't.'

'Well, well, mayn't I chance to see you, maybe? mayn't I look at you
marching, Masther Richard, at a distance only? I wouldn't care so much,
I think, if I could see you sometimes.'

'Now, there, Nan, you must not cry; you know 'tis all past and gone more
than a year ago. 'Twas all d----d folly--all my fault; I'm sorry,
Nan--I'm sorry; and I'm a changed man, and I'll lead a better life, and
so do you, my poor girl.'

'But mayn't I see you? Not to spake to you, Masther Richard. Only
sometimes to see you, far off, maybe.' Poor Nan was crying all the time
she spoke.--'Well, well, I'll go, I will, indeed, Masther Richard; only
let me kiss your hand--an' oh! no, no, don't say good-bye, an' I'll
go--I'm gone now, an' maybe--just maybe, you might some time chance to
wish to see your poor, wild Nan again--only to see her, an' I'll be
thinking o' that.'

The old feeling--if anything so coarse deserved the name--was gone; but
he pitied her with all his heart; and that heart, such as it was--though
she did not know it--was bleeding for her.

He saw her, poor creature, hurrying away in her light clothing, through
the sharp, moonlight chill, which, even in the wrapping of his thick
cloak, he felt keenly enough. She looked over her shoulder--then
stopped; perhaps, poor thing, she thought he was relenting, and then she
began to hurry back again. They cling so desperately to the last chance.
But that, you know, would never do. Another pleading--another
parting--So he turned sharply and strode into the thickets of the close
brushwood, among which the white mists of night were hanging. He
thought, as he stepped resolutely and quickly on, with a stern face, and
heavy heart, that he heard a wild sobbing cry in the distance, and that
was poor Nan's farewell.

So Devereux glided on like a ghost, through the noiseless thicket, and
scarcely knowing or caring where he went, emerged upon the broad open
plateau, and skirting the Fifteen Acres, came, at last, to a halt upon
the high ground overlooking the river--which ran, partly in long trains
of silver sparkles, and partly in deep shadow beneath him. Here he
stopped; and looked towards the village where he had passed many a
pleasant hour--with a profound and remorseful foreboding that there were
no more such pleasant hours for him; and his eye wandered among the
scattered lights that still twinkled from the distant windows; and he
fancied he knew, among them all, that which gleamed pale and dim through
the distant elms--the star of his destiny; and he looked at it across
the water--a greater gulf severed them--so near, and yet a star in
distance--with a strange mixture of sadness and defiance, tenderness and
fury.






 NUTTER'S NAME, AND MR. DANGERFIELD
STANDS AT THE ALTAR.


Poor Mrs. Nutter continued in a state of distracted and flighty
tribulation, not knowing what to make of it, nor, indeed, knowing the
worst; for the neighbours did not tell her half they might, nor drop a
hint of the dreadful suspicion that dogged her absent helpmate.

She was sometimes up rummaging among the drawers, and fidgeting about
the house, without any clear purpose, but oftener lying on her bed, with
her clothes on, crying. When she got hold of a friend, she disburthened
her soul, and called on him or her for endless consolations and
assurances, which, for the most part, she herself prescribed. There
were, of course, fits of despair as well as starts of hope; and bright
ideas, accounting for everything, and then clouds of blackness, and
tornadoes of lamentation.

Father Roach, a good-natured apostle, whose digestion suffered when
anyone he liked was in trouble, paid her a visit; and being somehow
confounded with Dr. Toole, was shown up to her bed-room, where the poor
little woman lay crying under the coverlet. On discovering where he was,
the good father was disposed to flinch, and get down stairs, in
tenderness to his 'character,' and thinking what a story 'them villians
o' the world'id make iv it down at the club there.' But on second
thoughts, poor little Sally being neither young nor comely, he ventured,
and sat down by the bed, veiled behind a strip of curtain, and poured
his mellifluous consolations into her open ears.

And poor Sally became eloquent in return. And Father Roach dried his
eyes, although she could not see him behind the curtain, and called her
'my daughter,' and 'dear lady,' and tendered such comforts as his
housekeeping afforded. 'Had she bacon in the house?' or 'maybe she'd
like a fat fowl?' 'She could not eat?' 'Why then she could make elegant
broth of it, and dhrink it, an' he'd keep another fattenin' until Nutter
himself come back.'

'And then, my honey, you an' himself'll come down and dine wid ould
Father Austin; an' we'll have a grand evenin' of it entirely, laughin'
over the remimbrance iv these blackguard troubles, acuishla! Or maybe
you'd accept iv a couple o' bottles of claret or canaries? I see--you
don't want for wine.'

So there was just one more offer the honest fellow had to make, and he
opened with assurances 'twas only between himself an' her--an' not a
sowl on airth 'id ever hear a word about it--and he asked her pardon,
but he thought she might chance to want a guinea or two, just till
Nutter came back, and he brought a couple in his waistcoat pocket.

Poor Father Roach was hard-up just then. Indeed, the being hard-up was a
chronic affection with him. Two horses were not to be kept for nothing.
Nor for the same moderate figure was it possible to maintain an asylum
for unfortunates and outlaws--pleasant fellows enough, but endowed with
great appetites and an unquenchable taste for consolation in fluid
forms.

A clerical provision in Father Roach's day, and church, was not by any
means what we have seen it since. At all events he was not often
troubled with the possession of money, and when half-a-dozen good
weddings brought him in fifty or a hundred pounds, the holy man was
constrained forthwith to make distribution of his assets among a score
of sour, and sometimes dangerous tradespeople. I mention this in no
disparagement of Father Roach, quite the contrary. In making the tender
of his two guineas--which, however, Sally declined--the worthy cleric
was offering the widow's mite; not like some lucky dogs who might throw
away a thousand or two and be nothing the worse; and you may be sure the
poor fellow was very glad to find she did not want it.

'Rather hard measure, it strikes me,' said Dangerfield, in the club, 'to
put him in the Hue-and-Cry.'

But there he was, sure enough, 'Charles Nutter, Esq., formerly of the
Mills, near Knockmaroon, in the county of Dublin;' and a full
description of the dress he wore, as well as of his height, complexion,
features--and all this his poor little wife, still inhabiting the Mills,
and quite unconscious that any man, woman, or child, who could prosecute
him to conviction, for a murderous assault on Dr. Sturk, should have Â£50
reward.

'News in to-day, by Jove,' said Toole, bustling solemnly into the club;
'by the packet that arrived at one o'clock, a man taken, answering
Nutter's description exactly, just going aboard of a Jamaica brig at
Gravesend, and giving no account of himself. He's to be sent over to
Dublin for identification.'

And when that was thoroughly discussed two or three times over, they
fell to talking of other subjects, and among the rest of Devereux, and
wondered what his plans were; and, there being no brother officers by,
whether he meant to keep his commission, and various speculations as to
the exact cause of the coldness shown him by General Chattesworth. Dick
Spaight thought it might be that he had not asked Miss Gertrude in
marriage.

But this was pooh-poohed. 'Besides, they knew at Belmont,' said Toole,
who was an authority upon the domestic politics of that family, and
rather proud of being so, 'just as well as I did that Gipsy Dick was in
love with Miss Lilias; and I lay you fifty he'd marry her to-morrow if
she'd have him.'

Toole was always a little bit more intimate with people behind their
backs, so he called Devereux 'Gipsy Dick.'

'She's ailing, I hear,' said old Slowe.

'She is, indeed, Sir,' answered the doctor, with a grave shake of the
head.

'Nothing of moment, I hope?' he asked.

'Why, you see it may be; she had a bad cough last winter, and this year
she took it earlier, and it has fallen very much on her lungs; and you
see, we can't say, Sir, what turn it may take, and I'm very sorry she
should be so sick and ailing--she's the prettiest creature, and the best
little soul; and I don't know, on my conscience, what the poor old
parson would do if anything happened her, you know. But I trust, Sir,
with care, you know, 'twill turn out well.'

The season for trout-fishing was long past and gone, and there were no
more pleasant rambles for Dangerfield and Irons along the flowery banks
of the devious Liffey. Their rods and nets hung up, awaiting the return
of genial spring; and the churlish stream, abandoned to its wintry mood,
darkled and roared savagely under the windows of the Brass Castle.

One dismal morning, as Dangerfield's energetic step carried him briskly
through the town, the iron gate of the church-yard, and the door of the
church itself standing open, he turned in, glancing upward as he passed
at Sturk's bed-room windows, as all the neighbours did, to see whether
General Death's white banners were floating there, and his tedious siege
ended--as end it must--and the garrison borne silently away in his
custody to the prison house.

Up the aisle marched Dangerfield, not abating his pace, but with a swift
and bracing clatter, like a man taking a frosty constitutional walk.

Irons was moping softly about in the neighbourhood of the reading-desk,
and about to mark the places of psalms and chapters in the great church
Bible and Prayer-book, and sidelong he beheld his crony of the angle
marching, with a grim confidence and swiftness, up the aisle.

'I say, where's Martin?' said Dangerfield, cheerfully.

'He's gone away, Sir.'

'Hey! then you've no one with you?'

'No, Sir.'

Dangerfield walked straight on, up the step of the communion-table, and
shoving open the little balustraded door, he made a gay stride or two
across the holy precinct, and with a quick right-about face, came to a
halt, the white, scoffing face, for exercise never flushed it, and the
cold, broad sheen of the spectacles, looked odd in the clerk's eyes,
facing the church-door, from beside the table of the sacrament,
displayed, as it were, in the very frame--foreground, background, and
all--in which he was wont to behold the thoughtful, simple, holy face of
the rector.

'Alone among the dead; and not afraid?' croaked the white face
pleasantly.

The clerk seemed always to writhe and sweat silently under the banter of
his comrade of the landing-net, and he answered, without lifting his
head, in a constrained and dogged sort of way, like a man who expects
something unpleasant--

'Alone? yes, Sir, there's none here but ourselves.'

And his face flushed, and the veins on his forehead stood out, as will
happen with a man who tugs at a weight that is too much for him.

'I saw you steal a glance at Charles when he came into the church here,
and it strikes me I was at the moment thinking of the same thing as you,
to wit, will he require any special service at our hands? Well, he does!
and you or I must do it. He'll give a thousand pounds, mind ye; and
that's something in the way of fellows like you and me; and whatever
else he may have done, Charles has never broke his word in a money
matter. And, hark'ee, can't you thumb over that Bible and Prayer-book on
the table here as well as there? Do so. Well--'

And he went on in a lower key, still looking full front at the
church-door, and a quick glance now and then upon Irons, across the
communion-table.

''Tis nothing at all--don't you see--what are you afraid of? It can't
change events--'tis only a question of to-day or to-morrow--a whim--a
maggot--hey? You can manage it this way, mark ye.'

He had his pocket-handkerchief by the two corners before him, like an
apron, and he folded it neatly and quickly into four.

'Don't you see--and a little water. You're a neat hand, you know; and if
you're interrupted, 'tis only to blow your nose in't--ha, ha, ha!--and
clap it in your pocket; and you may as well have the money--hey?
Good-morning.'

And when he had got half-way down the aisle, he called back to Irons, in
a loud, frank voice--

'And Martin's not here--could you say where he is?'

But he did not await the answer, and glided with quick steps from the
porch, with a side leer over the wavy green mounds and tombstones. He
had not been three minutes in the church, and across the street he went,
to the shop over the way, and asked briskly where Martin, the sexton,
was. Well, they did not know.

'Ho! Martin,' he cried across the street, seeing that functionary just
about to turn the corner by Sturk's hall-door steps; 'a word with you.
I've been looking for you. See, you must take a foot-rule, and make all
the measurements of that pew, you know; don't mistake a hair's breadth,
d'ye mind, for you must be ready to swear to it; and bring a note of it
to me, at home, to-day, at one o'clock, and you shall have a
crown-piece.'

From which the reader will perceive--as all the world might, if they had
happened to see him enter the church just now--that his object in the
visit was to see and speak with Martin; and that the little bit of
banter with Irons, the clerk, was all by-play, and parenthesis, and
beside the main business, and, of course, of no sort of consequence.

Mr. Irons, like most men of his rank in life, was not much in the habit
of exact thinking. His ruminations, therefore, were rather confused,
but, perhaps, they might be translated in substance, into something like
this--

'Why the ---- can't he let them alone that's willing to let him alone? I
wish he was in his own fiery home, and better people at rest. I can't
mark them places--I don't know whether I'm on my head or heels.'

And he smacked the quarto Prayer-book down upon the folio Bible with a
sonorous bang, and glided out, furious, frightened, and taciturn, to the
Salmon House.

He came upon Dangerfield again only half-a-dozen steps from the turn
into the street. He had just dismissed Martin, and was looking into a
note in his pocket-book, and either did not see, or pretended not to
see, the clerk. But some one else saw and recognised Mr. Irons; and, as
he passed, directed upon him a quick, searching glance. It was Mr.
Mervyn, who happened to pass that way. Irons and Dangerfield, and the
church-yard--there was a flash of association in the group and the
background which accorded with an old suspicion. Dangerfield, indeed,
was innocently reading a leaf in his red and gilt leather pocket-book,
as I have said. But Irons's eyes met the glance of Mervyn, and
contracted oddly, and altogether there gleamed out something indefinable
in his look. It was only for a second--a glance and an intuition; and
from that moment it was one of Mervyn's immovable convictions, that Mr.
Dangerfield knew something of Irons's secret. It was a sort of
intermittent suspicion before--now it was a monstrous, but fixed belief.

So Mr. Irons glided swiftly on to the Salmon House, where, in a dark
corner, he drank something comfortable; and stalked back again to the
holy pile, with his head aching, and the world round him like a wild and
evil dream.







WALSINGHAM VISITED CAPTAIN RICHARD DEVEREUX AT HIS LODGINGS.


And now there was news all over the town, to keep all the tongues there
in motion.

News--news--great news!--terrible news! Peter Fogarty, Mr. Tresham's
boy, had it that morning from his cousin, Jim Redmond, whose aunt lived
at Ringsend, and kept the little shop over against the 'Plume of
Feathers,' where you might have your pick and choice of all sorts of
nice and useful things--bacon, brass snuff-boxes, penny ballads, eggs,
candles, cheese, tobacco-pipes, pinchbeck buckles for knee and instep,
soap, sausages, and who knows what beside.

No one quite believed it--it was a tradition at third hand, and Peter
Fogarty's cousin, Jim Redmond's aunt, was easy of faith;--Jim, it was
presumed, not very accurate in narration, and Peter, not much better.
Though, however, it was not actually 'intelligence,' it was a startling
thesis. And though some raised their brows and smiled darkly, and shook
their heads, the whole town certainly pricked their ears at it. And not
a man met another without 'Well! anything more? You've heard the report,
Sir--eh?'

It was not till Doctor Toole came out of town, early that day, that the
sensation began in earnest.

'There could be no doubt about it--'twas a wonderful strange thing
certainly. After so long a time--and so well preserved too.'

'What was it--what is it?'

'Why, Charles Nutter's corpse is found, Sir!'

'Corpse--hey!'

'So Toole says. Hollo! Toole--Doctor Toole--I say. Here's Mr. Slowe
hasn't heard about poor Nutter.'

'Ho! neighbour Slowe--give you good-day, Sir--not heard it? By Jove,
Sir--poor Nutter!--'tis true--his body's found--picked up this morning,
just at sunrise, by two Dunleary fishermen, off Bullock. Justice Lowe
has seen it--and Spaight saw it too. I've just been speaking with him,
not an hour ago, in Thomas Street. It lies at Ringsend--and an inquest
in the morning.'

And so on in Doctor Toole's manner, until he saw Dr. Walsingham, the
good rector, pausing in his leisurely walk just outside the row of
houses that fronted the turnpike, in one of which were the lodgings of
Dick Devereux.

The good Doctor Toole wondered what brought his reverence there, for he
had an inkling of something going on. So he bustled off to him, and told
his story with the stern solemnity befitting such a theme, and that
pallid, half-suppressed smile with which an exciting horror is sometimes
related. And the good rector had many ejaculations of consternation and
sympathy, and not a few enquiries to utter. And at last, when the theme
was quite exhausted, he told Toole, who still lingered on, that he was
going to pay his respects to Captain Devereux.

'Oh!' said cunning little Toole, 'you need not, for I told him the whole
matter.'

'Very like, Sir,' answered the doctor; 'but 'tis on another matter I
wish to see him.'

'Oh!--ho!--certainly--very good, Sir. I beg pardon--and--and--he's just
done his breakfast--a late dog, Sir--ha! ha! Your servant, Doctor
Walsingham.'

Devereux puzzled his comrade Puddock more than ever. Sometimes he would
descend with his blue devils into the abyss, and sit there all the
evening in a dismal sulk. Sometimes he was gayer even than his old gay
self; and sometimes in a bitter vein, talking enigmatical ironies, with
his strange smile; and sometimes he was dangerous and furious, just as
the weather changes, without rhyme or reason. Maybe he was angry with
himself, and thought it was with others; and was proud, sorry, and
defiant, and let his moods, one after another, possess him as they came.

They were his young days--beautiful and wicked--days of clear, rich
tints, and sanguine throbbings, and gloria mundi--when we fancy the
spirit perfect, and the body needs no redemption--when, fresh from the
fountains of life, death is but a dream, and we walk the earth like
heathen gods and goddesses, in celestial egotism and beauty. Oh, fair
youth!--gone for ever. The parting from thee was a sadness and a
violence--sadder, I think, than death itself. We look behind us, and
sigh after thee, as on the pensive glories of a sunset, and our march is
toward the darkness. It is twilight with us now, and will soon be
starlight, and the hour and place of slumber, till the reveille sounds,
and the day of wonder opens. Oh, grant us a good hour, and take us to
Thy mercy! But to the last those young days will be remembered and worth
remembering; for be we what else we may, young mortals we shall never be
again.

Of course Dick Devereux was now no visitor at the Elms. All that for
the present was over. Neither did he see Lilias; for little Lily was now
a close prisoner with doctors, in full uniform, with shouldered canes,
mounting guard at the doors. 'Twas a hard winter, and she needed care
and nursing. And Devereux chafed and fretted; and, in truth, 'twas hard
to bear this spite of fortune--to be so near, and yet so far--quite out
of sight and hearing.

A word or two from General Chattesworth in Doctor Walsingham's ear, as
they walked to and fro before the white front of Belmont, had decided
the rector on making this little call; for he had now mounted the stair
of Devereux's lodging, and standing on the carpet outside, knocked, with
a grave, sad face on his door panel, glancing absently through the lobby
window, and whistling inaudibly the while.

The doctor was gentle and modest, and entirely kindly. He held good
Master Feltham's doctrine about reproofs. 'A man,' says he, 'had better
be convinced in private than be made guilty by a proclamation. Open
rebukes are for Magistrates, and Courts of Justice! for Stelled Chambers
and for Scarlets, in the thronged Hall Private are for friends; where
all the witnesses of the offender's blushes are blinde and deaf and
dumb. We should do by them as Joseph thought to have done by Mary, seeke
to cover blemishes with secrecy. Public reproofe is like striking of a
Deere in the Herd; it not only wounds him to the loss of enabling blood,
but betrays him to the Hound, his Enemy, and makes him by his fellows be
pusht out of company.'

So on due invitation from within, the good parson entered, and the
handsome captain in all his splendours--when you saw him after a little
absence 'twas always with a sort of admiring surprise--you had forgot
how very handsome he was--this handsome slender fellow, with his dark
face and large, unfathomable violet eyes, so wild and wicked, and yet so
soft, stood up surprised, with a look of welcome quickly clouded and
crossed by a gleam of defiance.

They bowed, and shook hands, however, and bowed again, and each was the
other's 'servant;' and being seated, they talked de generalibus; for
the good parson would not come like an executioner and take his prisoner
by the throat, but altogether in the spirit of the shepherd, content to
walk a long way about, and wait till he came up with the truant, and
entreating him kindly, not dragging or beating him back to the flock,
but leading and carrying by turns, and so awaiting his opportunity. But
Devereux was in one of his moods. He thought the doctor no friend to his
suit, and was bitter, and formal, and violent.









Mr. Dangerfield was at the club that night, and was rather in spirits
than otherwise, except, indeed, when poor Charles Nutter was talked of.
Then he looked grave, and shrugged, and shook his head, and said--

'A bad business, Sir; and where's his poor wife?'

'Spending the night with us, poor soul,' said Major O'Neill, mildly,
'and hasn't an idaya, poor thing; and indeed, I hope, she mayn't hear
it.'

'Pooh! Sir, she must hear it; but you know she might have heard worse,
Sir, eh?' rejoined Dangerfield.

'True for you, Sir,' said the major, suspending the filling of his pipe
to direct a quiet glance of significance at Dangerfield, and then
closing his eyes with a nod.

And just at this point in came Spaight.

'Well, Spaight!'

'Well, Sir.'

'You saw the body, eh?' and a dozen other interrogatories followed, as,
cold and wet with melting snow, dishevelled, and storm-beaten--for it
was a plaguy rough night--the young fellow, with a general greeting to
the company, made his way to the fire.

''Tis a tremendous night, gentlemen, so by your leave I'll stir the
fire--and, yes, I seen him, poor Nutter--and, paugh, an ugly sight he
is, I can tell you; here Larry, bring me a rummer-glass of punch--his
right ear's gone, and a'most all his right hand--and screeching hot, do
you mind--an', phiew--altogether 'tis sickening--them fishes, you
know--I'm a'most sorry I went in--you remember Dogherty's whiskey shop
in Ringsend--he lies in the back parlour, and wondherful little changed
in appearance.'

And so Mr. Spaight, with a little round table at his elbow, and his
heels over the fender, sipped his steaming punch, and thawed inwardly
and outwardly, as he answered their questions and mixed in their
speculations.

Up at the Mills, which had heard the awful news, first from the Widow
Macan, and afterwards from Pat Moran, the maids sat over their tea in
the kitchen in high excitement and thrilling chat--'The poor master!'
'Oh, the poor man!' 'Oh, la, what's that?' with a start and a peep over
the shoulders. 'And oh, dear, and how in the world will the poor little
misthress ever live over the news?' And so forth, made a principal part
of their talk. There was a good accompaniment of wind outside, and a
soft pelting of snow on the window panes, 'and oh, my dear life, but
wasn't it dark!'

Up went Moggy, with her thick-wicked kitchen candle, to seek repose; and
Betty, resolving not to be long behind, waited only 'to wash up her
plates' and slack down the fire, having made up her mind, for she grew
more nervous in solitude, to share Moggy's bed for that night.

Moggy had not been twenty minutes gone, and her task was nearly ended,
when--'Oh, blessed saints!' murmured Betty, with staring eyes, and
dropping the sweeping-brush on the flags, she heard, or thought she
heard, her master's step, which was peculiar, crossing the floor
overhead.

She listened, herself as pale as a corpse, and nearly as breathless; but
there was nothing now but the muffled gusts of the storm, and the close
soft beat of the snow, so she listened and listened, but nothing came of
it.

''Tis only the vapours,' said Betty, drawing a long breath, and doing
her best to be cheerful; and so she finished her labours, stopping every
now and then to listen, and humming tunes very loud, in fits and starts.
Then it came to her turn to take her candle and go up stairs; she was a
good half-hour later than Moggy--all was quiet within the house--only
the sound of the storm--the creak and rattle of its strain, and the
hurly-burly of the gusts over the roof and chimneys.

Over her shoulder she peered jealously this way and that, as with
flaring candle she climbed the stairs. How black the window looked on
the lobby, with its white patterns of snow flakes in perpetual
succession sliding down the panes. Who could tell what horrid face might
be looking in close to her as she passed, secure in the darkness and
that drifting white lace veil of snow? So nimbly and lightly up the
stairs climbed Betty, the cook.

If listeners seldom hear good of themselves, it is also true that
peepers sometimes see more than they like; and Betty, the cook, as she
reached the landing, glancing askance with ominous curiosity, beheld a
spectacle, the sight of which nearly bereft her of her senses.

Crouching in the deep doorway on the right of the lobby, the cook, I
say, saw something--a figure--or a deep shadow--only a deep shadow--or
maybe a dog. She lifted the candle--she peeped under the candlestick:
'twas no shadow, as I live, 'twas a well-defined figure!

He was draped in black, cowering low, with the face turned up. It was
Charles Nutter's face, fixed and stealthy. It was only while the
fascination lasted--while you might count one, two, three,
deliberately--that the horrid gaze met mutually. But there was no
mistake there. She saw the stern dark picture as plainly as ever she
did. The light glimmered on his white eye-balls.

Starting up, he struck at the candle with his hat. She uttered a loud
scream, and flinging stick and all at the figure, with a great clang
against the door behind, all was swallowed in instantaneous darkness;
she whirled into the opposite bed-room she knew not how, and locked the
door within, and plunged head-foremost under the bed-clothes, half mad
with terror.

The squall was heard of course. Moggy heard it, but she heeded not; for
Betty was known to scream at mice, and even moths. And as her door was
heard to slam, as was usual in panics of the sort, and as she returned
no answer, Moggy was quite sure there was nothing in it.

But Moggy's turn was to come. When spirits 'walk,' I've heard they make
the most of their time, and sometimes pay a little round of visits on
the same evening.

This is certain; Moggy was by no means so great a fool as Betty in
respect of hobgoblins, witches, banshees, pookas, and the world of
spirits in general. She eat heartily, and slept soundly, and as yet had
never seen the devil. Therefore such terrors as she that night
experienced were new to her, and I can't reasonably doubt the truth of
her narrative. Awaking suddenly in the night, she saw a light in the
room, and heard a quiet rustling going on in the corner, where the old
white-painted press showed its front from the wall. So Moggy popped her
head through her thin curtains at the side, and--blessed hour!--there
she saw the shape of a man looking into the press, the doors being wide
open, and the appearance of a key in the lock.

The shape was very like her master. The saints between us and harm! The
glow was reflected back from the interior of the press, and showed the
front part of the figure in profile with a sharp line of light. She said
he had some sort of thick slippers over his boots, a dark coat, with the
cape buttoned, and a hat flapping over his face; coat and hat and all,
sprinkled over with snow.

As if he heard the rustle of the curtain, he turned toward the bed, and
with an awful ejaculation she cried, ''Tis you, Sir!'

'Don't stir, and you'll meet no harm,' he said, and over he posts to the
bedside, and he laid his cold hand on her wrist, and told her again to
be quiet, and for her life to tell no one what she had seen, and with
that she supposed she swooned away; for the next thing she remembered
was listening in mortal fear, the room being all dark, and she heard a
sound at the press again, and then steps crossing the floor, and she
gave herself up for lost; but he did not come to the bedside any more,
and the tread passed out at the door, and so, as she thought, went down
stairs.

In the morning the press was locked and the door shut, and the hall-door
and back-door locked, and the keys on the hall-table, where they had
left them the night before.

You may be sure these two ladies were thankful to behold the gray light,
and hear the cheerful sounds of returning day; and it would be no easy
matter to describe which of the two looked most pallid, scared, and
jaded that morning, as they drank a hysterical dish of tea together in
the kitchen, close up to the window, and with the door shut,
discoursing, and crying, and praying over their tea-pot in miserable
companionship.





 TOOLE MAKES A LITTLE
EXCURSION; AND TWO CHOICE SPIRITS DISCOURSE, AND HEBE TRIPS IN WITH THE
NECTAR.


Up at the Elms, little Lily that night was sitting in the snug,
old-fashioned room, with the good old rector. She was no better; still
in doctors' hands and weak, but always happy with him, and he more than
ever gentle and tender with her; for though he never would give place to
despondency, and was naturally of a trusting, cheery spirit, he could
not but remember his young wife, lost so early; and once or twice there
was a look--an outline--a light--something, in little Lily's fair,
girlish face, that, with a strange momentary agony, brought back the
remembrance of her mother's stricken beauty, and plaintive smile. But
then his darling's gay talk and pleasant ways would reassure him, and
she smiled away the momentary shadow.

And he would tell her all sorts of wonders, old-world gaieties, long
before she was born; and how finely the great Mr. Handel played upon the
harpsichord in the Music Hall, and how his talk was in German, Latin,
French, English, Italian, and half-a-dozen languages besides, sentence
about; and how he remembered his own dear mother's dress when she went
to Lord Wharton's great ball at the castle--dear, oh! dear, how long ago
that was! And then he would relate stories of banshees, and robberies,
and ghosts, and hair-breadth escapes, and 'rapparees,' and adventures in
the wars of King James, which he heard told in his nonage by the old
folk, long vanished, who remembered those troubles.

'And now, darling,' said little Lily, nestling close to him, with a
smile, 'you must tell me all about that strange, handsome Mr. Mervyn;
who he is, and what his story.'

'Tut, tut! little rogue----'

'Yes, indeed, you must, and you will; you've kept your little Lily
waiting long enough for it, and she'll promise to tell nobody.'

'Handsome he is, and strange, no doubt--it was a strange fancy that
funeral. Strange, indeed,' said the rector.

'What funeral, darling?'

'Why, yes, a funeral--the bringing his father's body to be laid here in
the vault, in my church; it is their family vault. 'Twas a folly; but
what folly will not young men do?'

And the good parson poked the fire a little impatiently.

'Mr. Mervyn--not Mervyn--that was his mother's name; but--see, you
must not mention it, Lily, if I tell you--not Mr. Mervyn, I say, but
my Lord Dunoran, the only son of that disgraced and blood-stained
nobleman, who, lying in gaol, under sentence of death for a foul and
cowardly murder, swallowed poison, and so closed his guilty life with a
tremendous crime, in its nature inexpiable. There, that's all, and too
much, darling.'

'And was it very long ago?'

'Why, 'twas before little Lily was born; and long before that I knew
him--only just a little. He used the Tiled House for a hunting-lodge,
and kept his dogs and horses there--a fine gentleman, but vicious,
always, I fear, and a gamester; an overbearing man, with a dangerous
cast of pride in his eye. You don't remember Lady Dunoran?--pooh, pooh,
what am I thinking of? No, to be sure! you could not. 'Tis from her,
chiefly, poor lady, he has his good looks. Her eyes were large, and very
peculiar, like his--his, you know, are very fine. She, poor lady, did
not live long after the public ruin of the family.'

'And has he been recognised here? The townspeople are so curious.'

'Why, dear child, not one of them ever saw him before. He's been lost
sight of by all but a few, a very few friends. My Lord Castlemallard,
who was his guardian, of course, knows; and to me he disclosed himself
by letter; and we keep his secret; though it matters little who knows
it, for it seems to me he's as unhappy as aught could ever make him. The
townspeople take him for his cousin, who squandered his fortune in
Paris; and how is he the better of their mistake, and how were he the
worse if they knew him for whom he is? 'Tis an unhappy family--a curse
haunts it. Young in years, old in vice, the wretched nobleman who lies
in the vault, by the coffin of that old aunt, scarcely better than
himself, whose guineas supplied his early profligacy--alas! he ruined
his ill-fated, beautiful cousin, and she died heart-broken, and her
little child, both there--in that melancholy and contaminated house.'

So he rambled on, and from one tale to another, till little Lily's early
bed-hour came.

I don't know whether it was Doctor Walsingham's visit in the morning,
and the chance of hearing something about it, that prompted the unquiet
Tom Toole to roll his cloak about him, and buffet his way through storm
and snow, to Devereux's lodgings. It was only a stone's-throw; but even
that, on such a night, was no trifle.

However, up he went to Devereux's drawing-room, and found its handsome
proprietor altogether in the dumps. The little doctor threw off his
sleety cloak and hat in the lobby, and stood before the officer fresh
and puffing, and a little flustered and dazzled after his romp with the
wind.

Devereux got up and received him with a slight bow and no smile, and a
'Pray take a chair, Doctor Toole.'

'Well, this is a bright fit of the dismals,' said little Toole,
nothing overawed. 'May I sit near the fire?'

'Upon it,' said Devereux, sadly.

'Thank'ee,' said Toole, clapping his feet on the fender, with a grin,
and making himself comfortable. 'May I poke it?'

'Eat it--do as you please--anything--everything; play that fiddle
(pointing to the ruin of Puddock's guitar, which the lieutenant had left
on the table), or undress and go to bed, or get up and dance a minuet,
or take that pistol, with all my heart, and shoot me through the head.'

'Thank'ee, again. A fine choice of amusements, I vow,' cried the jolly
doctor.

'There, don't mind me, nor all I say, Toole. I'm, I suppose, in the
vapours; but, truly, I'm glad to see you, and I thank you, indeed I do,
heartily, for your obliging visit; 'tis very neighbourly. But, hang it,
I'm weary of the time--the world is a dull place. I'm tired of this
planet, and should not mind cutting my throat and trying a new star.
Suppose we make the journey together, Toole; there is a brace of pistols
over the chimney, and a fair wind for some of them.'

'Rather too much of a gale for my taste, thanking you again,' answered
Toole with a cosy chuckle; 'but, if you're bent on the trip, and can't
wait, why, at least, let's have a glass together before parting.'

'With all my heart, what you will. Shall it be punch?'

'Punch be it. Come, hang saving; get us up a ha'porth of whiskey,' said
little Toole, gaily.

'Hallo, Mrs. Irons, Madam, will you do us the favour to make a bowl of
punch as soon as may be?' cried Devereux, over the banister.

'Come, Toole,' said Devereux, 'I'm very dismal. Losses and crosses, and
deuce knows what. Whistle or talk, what you please, I'll listen; tell
me anything; stories of horses, dogs, dice, snuff, women, cocks,
parsons, wine--what you will. Come, how's Sturk? He's beaten poor
Nutter, and won the race; though the stakes, after all, were scarce
worth taking--and what's life without a guinea?--he's grown, I'm told,
so confoundedly poor, "quis pauper? avarus." A worthy man was Sturk,
and, in some respects, resembled the prophet, Shylock; but you know
nothing of him--why the plague don't you read your Bible, Toole?'

'Well,' said Toole, candidly, 'I don't know the Old Testament as well as
the New; but certainly, whoever he's like, he's held out wonderfully.
'Tis nine weeks since he met that accident, and there he's still, above
ground; but that's all--just above ground, you see.'

'And how's Cluffe?'

'Pooh, Cluffe indeed! Nothing ever wrong with him but occasional
over-eating. Sir, you'd a laughed to-day had you seen him. I gave him a
bolus, twice the size of a gooseberry. "What's this?" said he. "A
bolus," says I. "The devil," says he; "dia-bolus, then," says I--"hey?"
said I, "well?" ha! ha! and by Jove, Sir, it actually half stuck in his
oesophagus, and I shoved it down like a bullet, with a probang; you'd
a died a laughing, yet 'twasn't a bit too big. Why, I tell you, upon my
honour, Mrs. Rebecca Chattesworth's black boy, only t'other day,
swallowed a musket bullet twice the size, ha! ha!--he did--and I set him
to rights in no time with a little powder.'

'Gunpowder?' said Devereux. 'And what of O'Flaherty? I'm told he was
going to shoot poor Miles O'More.'

'Ha, ha! hey? Well, I don't think either remembered in the morning what
they quarrelled about,' replied Toole; 'so it went off in smoke, Sir.'

'Well, and how is Miles?'

'Why, ha, ha! he's back again, with a bill, as usual, and a horse to
sell--a good one--the black one, don't you remember? He wants five and
thirty guineas; 'tisn't worth two pounds ten. "Do you know anyone who
wants him? I would not mind taking a bill, with a couple of good names
upon it," says he. Upon my credit I believe he thought I'd buy him
myself. "Well," says I, "I think I do know a fellow that would give you
his value, and pay you cash besides," says I. 'Twas as good as a play to
see his face. "Who is he?" says he, taking me close by the arm. "The
knacker," says I. 'Twas a bite for Miles; hey? ha, ha, ha!'

'And is it true old Tresham's going to join our club at last?'

'He! hang him! he's like a brute beast, and never drinks but when he's
dry, and then small beer. But, I forgot to tell you, by all that's
lovely, they do say the charming Magnolia--a fine bouncing girl
that--is all but betrothed to Lieutenant O'Flaherty.'

Devereux laughed, and thus encouraged, Toole went on, with a wink and a
whisper.

'Why, the night of the ball, you know, he saw her home, and they say he
kissed her--by Bacchus, on both sides of the face,--at the door there,
under the porch; and you know, if he had not a right, she'd a-knocked
him down.'

'Psha! the girl's a Christian, and when she's smacked on one cheek she
turns the other. And what says the major to it?'

'Why, as it happened, he opened the door precisely as the thing
occurred; and he wished Lieutenant O'Flaherty good-night, and paid him a
visit in the morning. And they say 'tis all satisfactory; and--by Jove!
'tis good punch.' And Mrs. Irons entered with a china bowl on a tray.






 IN THE CEDAR-PARLOUR OF THE
TILED HOUSE, AND THE STORY OF MR. BEAUCLERC AND THE 'FLOWER DE LUCE'
BEGINS TO BE UNFOLDED.


It was an awful night, indeed, on which all this occurred, and that
apparition had shown itself up at the Mills. And truly it would seem the
devil had business on his hands, for in the cedar-parlour of the Tiled
House another unexpected manifestation occurred just about the same
hour.

What gentleman is there of broken fortunes, undefined rights, and in
search of evidence, without a legal adviser of some sort? Mr. Mervyn, of
course, had his, and paid for the luxury according to custom. And every
now and then off went a despatch from the Tiled House to the oracular
London attorney; sometimes it was a budget of evidence, and sometimes
only a string of queries. To-night, to the awful diapason of the
storm--he was penning one of these--the fruit of a tedious study of many
papers and letters, tied up in bundles by his desk, all of them redolent
of ominous or fearful associations.

I don't know why it is the hours fly with such a strange celerity in the
monotony and solitude of such nightwork. But Mervyn was surprised, as
many a one similarly occupied has been, on looking at his watch, to find
that it was now long past midnight; so he threw himself back in his
chair with a sigh, and thought how vainly his life was speeding away,
and heard, with a sort of wonder, how mad was the roar of the storm
without, while he had quietly penned his long rescript undisturbed.

The wild bursts of supernatural fury and agony which swell and mingle in
a hurricane, I dare say, led his imagination a strange aÃ«rial journey
through the dark. Now it was the baying of hell hounds, and the long
shriek of the spirit that flies before them. Anon it was the bellowing
thunder of an ocean, and the myriad voices of shipwreck. And the old
house quivering from base to cornice under the strain; and then there
would come a pause, like a gasp, and the tempest once more rolled up,
and the same mad hubbub shook and clamoured at the windows.

So he let his Pegasus spread his pinions on the blast, and mingled with
the wild rout that peopled the darkness; or, in plainer words, he
abandoned his fancy to the haunted associations of the hour, the storm,
and the house, with a not unpleasant horror. In one of these momentary
lulls of the wind, there came a sharp, distinct knocking on the
window-pane. He remembered with a thrill the old story of the
supernatural hand which had troubled that house, and began its pranks at
this very window.

Ay, ay, 'twas the impatient rapping of a knuckle on the glass quite
indisputably.

It is all very well weaving the sort of dream or poem with which Mervyn
was half amusing and half awing himself, but the sensation is quite
different when a questionable sound or sight comes uninvited to take the
matter out of the province of our fancy and the control of our will.
Mervyn found himself on his legs, and listening in a less comfortable
sort of horror, with his gaze fixed in the direction of that small sharp
knocking. But the storm was up again, and drowning every other sound in
its fury.

If Mr. Mervyn had been sufficiently frightened, he would have forthwith
made good his retreat to his bed-room, or, if he had not been frightened
at all, he would have kept his seat, and allowed his fancies to return
to their old channel. But, in fact, he took a light in his hand, and
opened a bit of the window-shutter. The snow, however, was spread over
the panes in a white, sliding curtain, that returned the light of his
candle, and hid all without. 'Twas idle trying to peer through it, but
as he did, the palm of a hand was suddenly applied to the glass on the
outside, and began briskly to rub off the snow, as if to open a
peep-hole for distinct inspection.

It was to be more this time than the apparition of a hand--a human face
was immediately presented close to the glass--not that of Nutter
either--no--it was the face of Irons--pale, with glittering eyes and
blue chin, and wet hair quivering against the glass in the storm.

He nodded wildly to Mervyn, brushing away the snow, beckoning towards
the back-door, as he supported himself on one knee on the window-stone,
and, with his lips close to the glass, cried, 'let me in;' but, in the
uproar of the storm, it was by his gestures, imperfectly as they were
seen, rather than by his words, that Mervyn comprehended his meaning.

Down went Mr. Mervyn, without a moment's hesitation, leaving the candle
standing on the passage table, drew the bolts, opened the door, and in
rushed Irons, in a furious gust, his cloak whirling about his head
amidst a bitter eddying of snow, and a distant clapping of doors
throughout the house.

The door secured again, Mr. Irons stood in his beflaked and dripping
mantle, storm-tossed, dishevelled, and alone once again in the shelter
of the Tiled House, to explain the motive of his visit.

'Irons! I could hardly believe it,' and Mervyn made a pause, and then,
filled with the one idea, he vehemently demanded, 'In Heaven's name,
have you come to tell me all you know?'

'Well, maybe--no,' answered the clerk: 'I don't know; I'll tell you
something. I'm going, you see, and I came here on my way; and I'll tell
you more than last time, but not all--not all yet.'

'Going? and where?--what are your plans?'

'Plans?--I've no plans. Where am I going!--nowhere--anywhere. I'm
going away, that's all.'

'You're leaving this place--eh, to return no more?'

'I'm leaving it to-night; I've the doctor's leave, Parson Walsingham.
What d'ye look at, Sir? d'ye think it's what I murdered any one? not but
if I stayed here I might though,' and Mr. Irons laughed a frightened,
half maniacal sort of laugh. 'I'm going for a bit, a fortnight, or so,
maybe, till things get quiet--(lead us not into temptation!)--to
Mullingar, or anywhere; only I won't stay longer at hell's door, within
stretch of that devil's long arm.'

'Come to the parlour,' said Mervyn, perceiving that Irons was chilled
and shivering.

There, with the door and window-shutters closed, a pair of candles on
the table, and a couple of faggots of that pleasant bog-wood, which
blazes so readily and fragrantly on the hearth, Irons shook off his
cloak, and stood, lank and grim, and, as it seemed to Mervyn, horribly
scared, but well in view, and trying, sullenly, to collect his thoughts.

'I'm going away, I tell you, for a little while; but I'm come to see
you, Sir, to think what I may tell you now, and above all, to warn you
again' saying to any living soul one word of what passed between us when
I last was here; you've kept your word honourable as yet; if you break
it I'll not return,' and he clenched it with an oath, 'I daren't
return.'

'I'll tell you the way it happened,' he resumed. ''Tis a good while now,
ay twenty-two years; your noble father's dead these twenty-two years and
upwards. 'Twas a bad murdher, Sir: they wor both bad murdhers. I look on
it, he's a murdhered man.'

'He--who?' demanded the young man.

'Your father, Sir.'

'My father murdered?' said Mervyn.

'Well, I see no great differ; I see none at all. I'll tell you how it
was.'

And he looked over his shoulder again, and into the corners of the room,
and then Mr. Irons began--

'I believe, Sir, there's no devil like a vicious young man, with a hard
heart and cool courage, in want of money. Of all the men I ever met
with, or heard tell of, Charles Archer was the most dreadful. I used
sometimes to think he was the devil. It wasn't long-headed or cunning
he was, but he knew your thoughts before you half knew them yourself. He
knew what every one was thinking of. He made up his mind at a glance,
and struck like a thunderbolt. As for pity or fear, he did not know what
they were, and his cunning was so deep and sure there was no catching
him.

'He came down to the Pied Horse Inn, where I was a drawer, at Newmarket,
twice.'

Mervyn looked in his face, quickly, with a ghastly kind of a start.

'Ay, Sir, av coorse you know it; you read the trial; av coorse you did.
Well, he came down there twice. 'Twas a good old house, Sir, lots of
room, and a well-accustomed inn. An' I think there was but two bad men
among all the servants of the house--myself and Glascock. He was an
under hostler, and a bad boy. He chose us two out of the whole lot, with
a look. He never made a mistake. He knew us some way like a crow knows
carrion, and he used us cleverly.'

And Irons cursed him.

'He's a hard master, like his own,' said Irons; 'his wages come to
nothing, and his services is hell itself. He could sing, and talk, and
drink, and keep things stirring, and the gentlemen liked him; and he
was, 'twas said, a wonderful fine player at whist, and piquet, and
ombre, and all sorts of card-playing. So you see he could afford to play
fair. The first time he came down, he fought three duels about a tipsy
quarrel over a pool of Pope Joan. There was no slur on his credit,
though; 'twas just a bit of temper. He wounded all three; two but
trifling; but one of them--Chapley, or Capley, I think, was his
name--through the lungs, and he died, I heard, abroad. I saw him
killed--'twasn't the last; it was done while you'd count ten. Mr. Archer
came up with a sort of a sneer, pale and angry, and 'twas a clash of the
small swords--one, two, three, and a spring like a tiger--and all over.
He was frightful strong; ten times as strong as he looked--all a
deception.'

'Well, Sir, there was a Jew came down, offering wagers, not, you see, to
gentlemen, Sir, but to poor fellows. And Mr. Archer put me and Glascock
up to bite him, as he said; and he told us to back Strawberry, and we
did. We had that opinion of his judgment and his knowledge--you see, we
thought he had ways of finding out these things--that we had no doubt of
winning, so we made a wager of twelve pounds. But we had no money--not a
crown between us--and we must stake gold with the host of the "Plume of
Feathers;" and the long and the short of it was, I never could tell how
he put it into our heads, to pledge some of the silver spoons and a gold
chain of the master's, intending to take them out when we won the money.
Well, Strawberry lost, and we were left in the lurch. So we told Mr.
Archer how it was; for he was an off-handed man when he had anything in
view, and he told us, as we thought, he'd help us if we lost. "Help
you," says he, with a sort of laugh he had, "I want help myself; I
haven't a guinea, and I'm afraid you'll be hanged: and then," says he,
"stay a bit, and I'll find a way."

'I think he was in a bad plight just then himself; he was awful
expensive with horses and--and--other things; and I think there was a
writ, or maybe more, out against him, from other places, and he wanted a
lump of money in his hand to levant with, and go abroad. Well, listen,
and don't be starting, or making a row, Sir,' and a sulky, lowering,
hang-dog shadow, came over Irons. 'Your father, Lord Dunoran, played
cards; his partner was Mr. Charles Archer. Whist it was--with a
gentleman of the name of Beauclerc, and I forget the other--he wore a
chocolate suit, and a black wig. 'Twas I carried them their wine. Well,
Mr. Beauclerc won, and Mr. Archer stopped playing, for he had lost
enough; and the gentleman in the chocolate--what was his name?--Edwards,
I think--ay, 'twas--yes, Edwards, it was--was tired, and turned
himself about to the fire, and took a pipe of tobacco; and my lord, your
father, played piquet with Mr. Beauclerc; and he lost a power of money
to him, Sir; and, by bad luck, he paid a great part of it, as they
played, in rouleaus of gold, for he had won at the dice down stairs.
Well, Mr. Beauclerc was a little hearty, and he grew tired, and was for
going to bed. But my lord was angry, and being disguised with liquor
too, he would not let him go till they played more; and play they did,
and the luck still went the same way; and my lord grew fierce over it,
and cursed and drank, and that did not mend his luck you may be sure;
and at last Mr. Beauclerc swears he'd play no more; and both kept
talking together, and neither heard well what t'other said; but there
was some talk about settling the dispute in the morning.

'Well, Sir, in goes Mr. Beauclerc, staggering--his room was the Flower
de luce--and down he throws himself, clothes an' all, on his bed; and
then my lord turned on Mr. Edwards, I'm sure that was his name, and
persuades him to play at piquet; and to it they went.

'As I was coming in with more wine, I meets Mr. Archer coming out, "Give
them their wine," says he, in a whisper, "and follow me." An' so I did.
"You know something of Glascock, and have a fast hold of him," says he,
"and tell him quietly to bring up Mr. Beauclerc's boots, and come back
along with him; and bring me a small glass of rum." And back he goes
into the room where the two were stuck in their cards, and talking and
thinking of nothing else.'





 IRONS'S NARRATIVE REACHES MERTON MOOR.


'Well, I did as he bid me, and set the glass of rum before him, and in
place of drinking it, he follows me out. "I told you," says he, "I'd
find a way, and I'm going to give you fifty guineas apiece. Stand you at
the stair-head," says he to Glascock, "and listen; and if you hear
anyone coming, step into Mr. Beauclerc's room with his boots, do you
see, for I'm going to rob him." I thought I'd a fainted, and Glascock,
that was a tougher lad than me, was staggered; but Mr. Archer had a way
of taking you by surprise, and getting you into a business before you
knew where you were going. "I see, Sir," says Glascock. "And come you
in, and I'll do it," says Mr. Archer, and in we went, and Mr. Beauclerc
was fast asleep.

'I don't like talking about it,' said Irons, suddenly and savagely, and
he got up and walked, with a sort of a shrug of the shoulders, to and
fro half-a-dozen times, like a man who has a chill, and tries to make
his blood circulate.

Mervyn commanded himself, for he knew the man would return to his tale,
and probably all the sooner for being left to work off his transient
horror how he might.

'Well, he did rob him, and I often thought how cunningly, for he took no
more than about half his gold, well knowing, I'm now sure, neither he
nor my lord, your father, kept any count; and there was a bundle of
notes in his pocket-book, which Mr. Archer was thinning swiftly, when
all of a sudden, like a ghost rising, up sits Mr. Beauclerc, an unlucky
rising it was for him, and taking him by the collar--he was a powerful
strong man--"You've robbed me, Archer," says he. I was behind Mr.
Archer, and I could not see what happened, but Mr. Beauclerc made a sort
of a start and a kick out with his foot, and seemed taken with a tremble
all over, for while you count three, and he fell back in the bed with
his eyes open, and Mr. Archer drew a thin long dagger out of the dead
man's breast, for dead he was.

"What are you afraid of, you ---- fool?" says he, shaking me up; "I know
what I'm about; I'll carry you through; your life's in my hands, mine in
yours, only be cool." He was that himself, if ever man was, and quick as
light he closed the dead man's eyes, saying, "in for a penny in for a
pound," and he threw a bit of the coverlet over his breast, and his
mouth and chin, just as a man might draw it rolling round in the bed,
for I suppose he thought it best to hide the mouth that was open, and
told its tale too plainly, and out he was on the lobby the next
instant. "Don't tell Glascock what's happened, 'twill make him look
queer; let him put in the boots, and if he's asked, say Mr. Beauclerc
made a turn in the bed, and a grumbling, like a man turning over in his
sleep, while he was doing so, d'ye see, and divide this, 'twill settle
your little trouble, you know." 'Twas a little paper roll of a hundred
guineas. An' that's the way Mr. Beauclerc came by his death.'

This to Mervyn was the sort of shock that might have killed an older
man. The dreadful calamity that had stigmatised and beggared his
family--the horror and shame of which he well remembered, when first
revealed to him, had held him trembling and tongue-tied for more than an
hour before tears came to his relief, and which had ever since blackened
his sky, with a monotony of storm and thunder, was in a moment shown to
be a chimera. No wonder that he was for a while silent, stunned, and
bewildered. At last he was able--pale and cold--to lift up his clasped
hands, his eyes, and his heart, in awful gratitude, to the Author of
Mercy, the Revealer of Secrets, the Lord of Life and Truth.

'And where is this Charles Archer--is he dead or living?' urged Mervyn
with an awful adjuration.

'Ay, where to catch him, and how--Dead? Well, he's dead to some, you
see, and living to others; and living or dead, I'll put you on his track
some fine day, if you're true to me; but not yet awhile, and if you turn
a stag, or name my name to living soul (and here Mr. Irons swore an oath
such as I hope parish clerks don't often swear, and which would have
opened good Dr. Walsingham's eyes with wonder and horror), you'll never
hear word more from me, and I think, Sir, you'll lose your life beside.'

'Your threats of violence are lost on me, I can take care of myself,'
said Mervyn, haughtily.

The clerk smiled a strange sort of smile.

'But I've already pledged my sacred honour not to mention your name or
betray your secret.'

'Well, just have patience, and maybe I'll not keep you long; but 'tis no
trifle for a man to make up his mind to what's before me, maybe.'

After a pause, Irons resumed--

'Well, Sir, you see, Mr. Archer sat down by the fire and smoked a pipe,
and was as easy and pleased, you'd say, to look on him, as a man need
be; and he called for cards when my lord wanted them, and whatever else
he needed, making himself busy and bustling--as I afterwards thought to
make them both remember well that he was in the room with them.

'In and out of the chamber I went with one thing or another, and every
time I passed Mr. Beauclerc's room I grew more and more frightened; and,
truth to say, I was a scared man, and I don't know how I got through my
business; every minute expecting to hear the outcry from the dead man's
room.

'Mr. Edwards had an appointment, he said--nothing good, you may be
sure--they were a rake-helly set--saving your presence. Neither he nor
my lord had lost, I believe, anything to signify to one another; and my
lord, your father, made no difficulty about his going away, but began to
call again for Mr. Beauclerc, and to curse him--as a half-drunk man
will, making a power of noise; and, "Where's he gone to?" and, "Where's
his room?" and, "---- him, he shall play, or fight me." You see, Sir, he
had lost right and left that time, and was an angry man, and the liquor
made him half mad; and I don't think he knew rightly what he was doing.
And out on the lobby with him swearing he should give him his revenge,
or he'd know the reason why.

"Where's Mr. Beauclerc's room?" he shouts to me, as if he'd strike me; I
did not care a rush about that, but I was afraid to say--it stuck in my
throat like--and I stared at Mr. Archer; and he calls to the
chamber-maid, that was going up stairs, "Where does Mr. Beauclerc lie?"
and she, knowing him, says at once, "The Flower de luce," and pointed to
the room; and with that, my lord staggered up to the door, with his
drawn sword in hand, bawling on him to come out, and fumbling with the
pin; he could not open it; so he knocked it open with a kick, and in
with him, and Mr. Archer at his elbow, soothing him like; and I, I don't
know how--behind him.

'By this time he had worked himself into a mad passion, and says he,
"Curse your foxing--if you won't play like a man, you may die like a
dog." I think 'twas them words ruined him; the chamber-maid heard them
outside; and he struck Mr. Beauclerc half-a-dozen blows with the side of
the small-sword across the body, here and there, quite unsteady; and
"Hold, my lord, you've hurt him," cries Mr. Archer, as loud as he could
cry. "Put up your sword for Heaven's sake," and he makes a sort of
scuffle with my lord, in a friendly way, to disarm him, and push him
away, and "Throw down the coverlet and see where he's wounded," says he
to me; and so I did, and there was a great pool of blood--we knew all
about that--and my lord looked shocked when he seen it. "I did not mean
that," says my lord; "but," says he, with a sulky curse, "he's well
served."

'I don't know whether Glascock was in the room or not all this while,
maybe he was; at any rate, he swore to it afterwards; but you've read
the trial, I warrant. The room was soon full of people. The dead man was
still warm--'twas well for us. So they raised him up; and one was for
trying one thing, and another; and my lord was sitting stupid-like all
this time by the wall; and up he gets, and says he, "I hope he's not
dead, but if he be, upon my honour, 'tis an accident--no more. I call
Heaven to witness, and the persons who are now present; and pledge my
sacred honour, as a peer, I meant no more than a blow or two."

"You hear, gentlemen, what my lord says, he meant only a blow or two,
and not to take his life," cries Mr. Archer.

'So my lord repeats it again, cursing and swearing, like St. Peter in
the judgment hall.

'So, as nobody was meddling with my lord, out he goes, intending, I
suppose, to get away altogether, if he could. But Mr. Underwood missed
him, and he says, "Gentlemen, where's my Lord Dunoran? we must not
suffer him to depart;" and he followed him--two or three others going
along with him, and they met him with his hat and cloak on, in the
lobby, and he says, stepping between him and the stairs,--

'"My lord, you must not go, until we see how this matter ends."

'"Twill end well enough," says he, and without more ado he walks back
again.

'So you know the rest--how that business ended, at least for him.'

'And you are that very Zekiel Irons who was a witness on the trial?'
said Mervyn, with a peculiar look of fear and loathing fixed on him.

'The same,' said Irons, doggedly; and after a pause, 'but I swore to
very little; and all I said was true--though it wasn't the whole truth.
Look to the trial, Sir, and you'll see 'twas Mr. Archer and Glascock
that swore home against my lord--not I. And I don't think myself,
Glascock was in the room at all when it happened--so I don't.'

'And where is that wretch, Glascock, and that double murderer Archer;
where is he?'

'Well, Glascock's making clay.'

'What do you mean?'

'Under ground, this many a day. Listen: Mr. Archer went up to London,
and he was staying at the Hummums, and Glascock agreed with me to leave
the "Pied Horse." We were both uneasy, and planned to go up to London
together; and what does he do--nothing less would serve him--but he
writes a sort of letter, asking money of Mr. Archer under a threat.
This, you know, was after the trial. Well, there came no answer; but
after a while--all on a sudden--Mr. Archer arrives himself at the "Pied
Horse;" I did not know then that Glascock had writ to him--for he meant
to keep whatever he might get to himself. "So," says Mr. Archer to me,
meeting me by the pump in the stable-yard, "that was a clever letter you
and Glascock wrote to me in town."

'So I told him 'twas the first I heard of it.

'"Why," says he, "do you mean to tell me you don't want money?"

'I don't know why it was, but a sort of a turn came over me and I said,
"No."

'"Well," says he, "I'm going to sell a horse, and I expect to be paid
to-morrow; you and Glascock must wait for me outside"--I think the name
of the village was Merton--I'm not sure, for I never seen it before or
since--"and I'll give you some money then."

'"I'll have none," says I.

'"What, no money?" says he. "Come, come."

'"I tell you, Sir, I'll have none," says I. Something, you see, came
over me, and I was more determined than ever. I was always afeard of
him, but I feared him like Beelzebub now. "I've had enough of your
money, Sir; and I tell you what, Mr. Archer, I think 'tis best to end
our dealings, and I'd rather, if you please, Sir, never trouble you
more."

'"You're a queer dog," says he, with his eye fast on me, and musing for
a while--as if he could see into my brain, and was diverted by what he
found there;--"you're a queer dog, Irons. Glascock knows the world
better, you see; and as you and he are going up to London together, and
I must give the poor devil a lift, I'll meet you at the other side of
Merton, beyond the quarry--you know the moor--on Friday evening, after
dark--say seven o'clock--we must be quiet, you know, or people will be
talking."

'Well, Sir, we met him, sure enough, at the time and place.'





 IRONS IS SWALLOWED IN DARKNESS.


''Twas a darkish night--very little moon--and he made us turn off the
road, into the moor--black and ugly it looked, stretching away four or
five miles, all heath and black peat, stretches of little broken
hillocks, and a pool or tarn every now and again. An' he kept looking
back towards the road, and not a word out of him. Well, I did not like
meeting him at all if I could help it, but I was in dread of him; and I
thought he might suppose I was plotting mischief if I refused. So I made
up my mind to do as he bid me for the nonce, and then have done with
him.

'By this time we were in or about a mile from the road, and we got over
a low rising ground, and back nor forward, nor no way could we see
anything but the moor; and I stopped all of a sudden, and says I, "We're
far enough, I'll go no further."

'"Good," says Mr. Archer; "but let's go yonder, where the stones are--we
can sit as we talk--for I'm tired."

'There was half-a-dozen white stones there by the side of one of these
black tarns. We none of us talked much on that walk over the moor. We
had enough to think of, each of us, I dare say.

'"This will do," says Mr. Archer, stopping beside the pool; but he did
not sit, though the stones were there. "Now, Glascock, here I am, with
the price of my horse in my pocket; what do you want?"

'Well, when it came to the point so sudden, Glascock looked a bit shy,
and hung his head, and rowled his shoulders, and shuffled his feet a
bit, thinking what he'd say.

'"Hang it, man; what are you afraid of? we're friends," says Mr. Archer,
cheerfully.

'"Surely, Sir," says Glascock, "I did not mean aught else."

'And with that Mr. Archer laughed, and says he--

'"Come--you beat about the bush--let's hear your mind."

'"Well, Sir, 'tis in my letter," says he.

'"Ah, Glascock," says he, "that's a threatening letter. I did not think
you'd serve me so. Well, needs must when the devil drives." And he
laughed again, and shrugs up his shoulders, and says he, putting his
hand in his pocket, "there's sixty pounds left; 'tis all I have; come,
be modest--what do you say?"

'"You got a lot of gold off Mr. Beauclerc," says Glascock.

'"Not a doit more than I wanted," says he, laughing again. "And who,
pray, had a better right--did not I murder him?"

'His talk and his laughing frightened me more and more.

'"Well, I stood to you then, Sir; didn't I?" says Glascock.

'"Heart of oak, Sir--true as steel; and now, how much do you want?
Remember, 'tis all I have--and I out at elbows; and here's my friend
Irons, too--eh?"

'"I want nothing, and I'll take nothing," says I; "not a shilling--not a
half-penny." You see there was something told me no good would come of
it, and I was frightened besides.

'"What! you won't go in for a share, Irons?" says he.

'"No; 'tis your money, Sir--I've no right to a sixpence--and I won't
have it," says I; "and there's an end."

'"Well, Glascock, what say you?--you hear Irons."

'"Let Irons speak for himself--he's nothing to me. You should have
considered me when all that money was took from Mr. Beauclerc--one done
as much as another--and if 'twas no more than holding my tongue, still
'tis worth a deal to you."

'"I don't deny--a deal--everything. Come--there's sixty pounds
here--but, mark, 'tis all I have--how much?"

'"I'll have thirty, and I'll take no less," says Glascock, surly enough.

'"Thirty! 'tis a good deal--but all considered--perhaps not too much,"
says Mr. Archer.

'And with that he took his right hand from his breeches' pocket, and
shot him through the heart with a pistol.

'Neither word, nor stir, nor groan, did Glascock make; but with a sort
of a jerk, flat on his back he fell, with his head on the verge of the
tarn.

'I believe I said something--I don't know--I was almost as dead as
himself--for I did not think anything that bad was near at all.

'"Come, Irons--what ails you--steady, Sir--lend me a hand, and you'll
take no harm."

'He had the pistol he discharged in his left hand by this time, and a
loaded one in his right.

'"'Tis his own act, Irons. I did not want it; but I'll protect myself,
and won't hold my life on ransom, at the hands of a Jew or a Judas,"
said he, smiling through his black hair, as white as a tombstone.

'"I am neither," says I.

'"I know it," says he; "and so you're here, and he there."

'"Well, 'tis over now, I suppose," says I. I was thinking of making off.

'"Don't go yet," says he, like a man asking a favour; but he lifted the
pistol an inch or two, with a jerk of his wrist, "you must help me to
hide away this dead fool."

'Well, Sir, we had three or four hours cold work of it--we tied stones
in his clothes, and sunk him close under the bank, and walled him over
with more. 'Twas no light job, I can tell you the water was near four
feet deep, though 'twas a dry season; and then we slipped out a handsome
slice of the bank over him; and, making him all smooth, we left him to
take his chance; and I never heard any talk of a body being found there;
and I suppose he's now where we left him.'

And Irons groaned.

'So we returned silent and tired enough, and I in mortal fear of him.
But he designed me no hurt. There's luckily some risk in making away
with a fellow, and 'tisn't done by any but a fool without good cause;
and when we got on the road again, I took the London road, and he turned
his back on me, and I don't know where he went; but no doubt his plans
were well shaped.

''Twas an ugly walk for me, all alone, over that heath, I can tell you.
'Twas mortal dark; and there was places on the road where my footsteps
echoed back, and I could not tell but 'twas Mr. Archer following me,
having changed his mind, maybe, or something as bad, if that could be;
and many's the time I turned short round, expecting to see him, or may
be that other lad, behind, for you see I got a start like when he shot
Glascock; and there was a trembling over me for a long time after.

'Now, you see, Glascock's dead, and can't tell tales no more nor Mr.
Beauclerc, and Dr. Sturk's a dead man too, you may say; and I think he
knew--that is--brought to mind somewhat. He lay, you see, on the night
Mr. Beauclerc lost his life, in a sort of a dressing-room, off his
chamber, and the door was open; but he was bad with a fall he had, and
his arm in splints, and he under laudanum--in a trance like--and on the
inquest he could tell nothing; but I think he remembered something more
or less concerning it after.' And Mr. Irons took a turn, and came back
very close to Mervyn, and said very gently, 'and I think Charles Archer
murdered him.'

'Then Charles Archer has been in Dublin, perhaps in Chapelizod, within
the last few months,' exclaimed Mervyn, in a sort of agony.

'I didn't say so,' answered Irons. 'I've told you the truth--'tis the
truth--but there's no catching a ghost--and who'd believe my story? and
them things is so long ago. And suppose I make a clean breast of it, and
that I could bring you face to face with him, the world would not
believe my tale, and I'd then be a lost man, one way or another--no one,
mayhap, could tell how--I'd lose my life before a year, and all the
world could not save me.'

'Perhaps--perhaps Charles Nutter's the man; and Mr. Dangerfield knows
something of him,' cried Mervyn.

Irons made no answer, but sat quite silent for some seconds, by the
fire, the living image of apathy.

'If you name me, or blab one word I told you, I hold my peace for ever,'
said he, slowly, with a quiet oath, but very pale, and how blue his chin
looked--how grim his smile, with his face so shiny, and his eyelids
closed. You're to suppose, Sir, 'tis possible Mr. Dangerfield has a
guess at him. Well, he's a clever man, and knows how to put this and
that together; and has been kind to Dr. Sturk and his family. He's a
good man, you know; and he's a long-headed gentleman, they say; and if
he takes a thing in hand, he'll be as like as another to bring it about.
But sink or swim my mind's made up. Charles Archer, wherever he is, will
not like my going--he'll sniff danger in the wind, Sir. I could not
stay--he'd have had me--you see, body and soul. 'Twas time for me to
go--and go or stay, I see nothing but bad before me. 'Twas an evil day I
ever saw his face; and 'twould be better for me to have a cast for my
life at any rate, and that I'm nigh-hand resolved on; only you see my
heart misgives me--and that's how it is. I can't quite make up my mind.'

For a little while Mervyn stood in an agony of irresolution. I'm sure I
cannot understand all he felt, having never been, thank Heaven! in a
like situation. I only know how much depended on it, and I don't wonder
that for some seconds he thought of arresting that lank, pale, sinister
figure by the fire, and denouncing him as, by his own confession, an
accessory to the murder of Beauclerc. The thought that he would slip
through his fingers, and the clue to vindication, fortune, and
happiness, be for ever lost, was altogether so dreadful that we must
excuse his forgetting for a moment his promise, and dismissing patience,
and even policy, from his thoughts.

But 'twas a transitory temptation only, and common sense seconded
honour. For he was persuaded that whatever likelihood there was of
leading Irons to the critical point, there was none of driving him
thither; and that Irons, once restive and impracticable, all his hopes
would fall to the ground.

'I am going,' said Irons, with quiet abruptness; 'and right glad the
storm's up still,' he added, in a haggard rumination, and with a strange
smile of suffering. 'In dark an' storm--curse him!--I see his face
everywhere. I don't know how he's got this hold over me,' and he cursed
him again and groaned dismally. 'A night like this is my chance--and so
here goes.'

'Remember, for Heaven's sake, remember,' said Mervyn, with agonised
urgency, as he followed him with a light along the passage to the
back-door.

Irons made no answer; and walking straight on, without turning his head,
only lifted his hand with a movement backward, like a man who silently
warns another from danger.

So Irons went forth into the night and the roaring storm, dark and
alone, like an evil spirit into desert places; and Mervyn barred the
door after him, and returned to the cedar parlour, and remained there
alone and long in profound and not unnatural agitation.






 GAMBLE, AND SEES AN UGLY
CLIENT OF THAT GENTLEMAN'S; AND SOMETHING CROSSES AN EMPTY ROOM.


'Here's a conspiracy with a vengeance!' muttered Toole, 'if a body
could only make head or tail of it. Widow!--Eh!--We'll see: why, she's
like no woman ever I saw. Mrs. Nutter, forsooth!' and he could
not forbear laughing at the conceit. 'Poor Charles! 'tis ridiculous--though
upon my life, I don't like it. It's just possible it may be all as
true as gospel--they're the most devilish looking pair I've seen
out of the dock--curse them--for many a day. I would not wonder if
they were robbers. The widow looks consumedly like a man in
petticoats--hey!--devilish like. I think I'll send Moran and Brien up to
sleep to-night in the house. But, hang it! if they were, they would not
come out in the daytime to give an alarm. Hollo! Moggy, throw me out one
of them papers till I see what it's about.'

So he conned over the notice which provoked him, for he could not half
understand it, and he was very curious.

'Well, keep it safe, Moggy,' said he. 'H'm--it does look like law
business, after all, and I believe it is. No--they're not
housebreakers, but robbers of another stamp--and a worse, I'll take my
davy.'

'See,' said he, as a thought struck him, 'throw me down both of them
papers again--there's a good girl. They ought to be looked after, I dare
say, and I'll see the poor master's attorney to-day, d'ye mind? and
we'll put our heads together--and, that's right--relict indeed!'

And, with a solemn injunction to keep doors locked and windows fast, and
a nod and a wave of his hand to Mistress Moggy, and muttering half a
sentence or an oath to himself, and wearying his imagination in search
of a clue to this new perplexity, he buttoned his pocket over the legal
documents, and strutted down to the village, where his nag awaited him
saddled, and Jimmey walking him up and down before the doctor's
hall-door.

Toole was bound upon a melancholy mission that morning. But though
properly a minister of life, a doctor is also conversant with death, and
inured to the sight of familiar faces in that remarkable disguise. So he
spurred away with more coolness, though not less regret than another
man, to throw what light he could upon the subject of the inquest which
was to sit upon the body of poor Charles Nutter.

The little doctor, on his way to Ringsend, without the necessity of
diverging to the right or left, drew bridle at the door of Mr. Luke
Gamble, on the Blind Quay, attorney to the late Charles Nutter, and
jumping to the ground, delivered a rattling summons thereupon.

It was a dusty, dreary, wainscoted old house--indeed, two old houses
intermarried--with doors broken through the partition walls--the floors
not all of a level--joined by steps up and down--and having three great
staircases, that made it confusing. Through the windows it was not easy
to see, such a fantastic mapping of thick dust and dirt coated the
glass.

Luke Gamble, like the house, had seen better days. It was not his fault;
but an absconding partner had well nigh been his ruin: and, though he
paid their liabilities, it was with a strain, and left him a poor man,
shattered his connexion, and made the house too large by a great deal
for his business.

Doctor Toole came into the clerk's room, and was ushered by one of these
gentlemen through an empty chamber into the attorney's sanctum. Up two
steps stumbled the physician, cursing the house for a place where a
gentleman was so much more likely to break his neck than his fast, and
found old Gamble in his velvet cap and dressing-gown, in conference with
a hard-faced, pale, and pock-marked elderly man, squinting unpleasantly
under a black wig, who was narrating something slowly, and with effort,
like a man whose memory is labouring to give up its dead, while the
attorney, with his spectacles on his nose, was making notes. The speaker
ceased abruptly, and turned his pallid visage and jealous, oblique eyes
on the intruder.

Luke Gamble looked embarrassed, and shot one devilish angry glance at
his clerk, and then made Doctor Toole very welcome.

When Toole had ended his narrative, and the attorney read the notices
through, Mr. Gamble's countenance brightened, and darkened and
brightened again, and with a very significant look, he said to the pale,
unpleasant face, pitted with small-pox--

'M. M.,' and nodded.

His companion extended his hand toward the papers.

'Never mind,' said the attorney; 'there's that here will fix M. M. in a
mighty tight vice.'

'And who's M. M., pray?' enquired Toole.

'When were these notices served, doctor?' asked Mr. Gamble.

'Not an hour ago; but, I say, who the plague's M. M.?' answered Toole.

'M. M.,' repeated the attorney, smiling grimly on the backs of the
notices which lay on the table; 'why there's many queer things to be
heard of M. M.; and the town, and the country, too, for that matter, is
like to know a good deal more of her before long; and who served them--a
process-server, or who?'

'Why, a fat, broad, bull-necked rascal, with a double chin, and a great
round face, the colour of a bad suet-dumplin', and a black patch over
his eye,' answered Toole.

'Very like--was he alone?' said Gamble.

'No--a long, sly she-devil in black, that looked as if she'd cut your
windpipe, like a cat in the dark, as pale as paper, and mighty large,
black, hollow eyes.'

'Ay--that's it,' said Gamble, who, during this dialogue, had thrown his
morning-gown over the back of the chair, and got on his coat, and opened
a little press in the wall, from which he took his wig, and so completed
his toilet.

'That's it?' repeated Toole: 'what's it?--what's what?'

'Why, 'tis David O'Regan--Dirty Davy, as we call him. I never knew him
yet in an honest case; and the woman's M. M.'

'Hey! to be sure--a woman--I know--I remember; and he was on the point
of breaking out with poor Mrs. Macnamara's secret, but recovered in
time. 'That's the she fortune-teller, the witch, M. M., Mary Matchwell;
'twas one of her printed cards, you know, was found lying in Sturk's
blood. Dr. Sturk, you remember, that they issued a warrant for, against
our poor friend, you know.'

'Ay, ay--poor Charles--poor Nutter. Are you going to the inquest?' said
Gamble; and, on a sudden, stopped short, with a look of great fear, and
a little beckon of his hand forward, as if he had seen something.

There was that in Gamble's change of countenance which startled Toole,
who, seeing that his glance was directed through an open door at the
other end of the room, skipped from his chair and peeped through it.
There was nothing, however, visible but a tenebrose and empty passage.

'What did you see--eh? What frightens you?' said Toole. 'One would think
you saw Nutter--like--like.'

Gamble looked horribly perturbed at these words.

'Shut it,' said he, nearing the door, on which Toole's hand rested.
Toole took another peep, and did so.

'Why, there's nothing there--like--like the women down at the Mills
there,' continued the doctor.

'What about the women?' enquired Gamble, not seeming to know very well
what he was saying, agitated still--perhaps, intending to keep Toole
talking.

'Why, the women--the maids, you know--poor Nutter's servants, down at
the Mills. They swear he walks the house, and they'll have it they saw
him last night.'

'Pish! Sir--'tis all conceit and vapours--women's fancies--a plague o'
them all. And where's poor Mrs. Nutter?' said Gamble, clapping on his
cocked-hat, and taking his cane, and stuffing two or three bundles of
law papers into his coat pockets.

'At home--at the Mills. She slept at the village and so missed the
ghost. The Macnamaras have been mighty kind. But when the news was told
her this morning, poor thing, she would not stay, and went home; and
there she is, poor little soul, breaking her heart.'

Mr. Gamble was not ceremonious; so he just threw a cursory and anxious
glance round the room, clapped his hands on his coat pockets, making a
bunch of keys ring somewhere deep in their caverns. And all being
right--

'Come along, gentlemen,' says he, 'I'm going to lock the door;' and
without looking behind him, he bolted forth abstractedly into his dusty
ante-room.

'Get your cloak about you, Sir--remember your cough, you know--the air
of the streets is sharp,' said he with a sly wink, to his ugly client,
who hastily took the hint.

'Is that coach at the door?' bawled Gamble to his clerks in the next
room, while he locked the door of his own snuggery behind him; and being
satisfied it was so, he conducted the party out by a side door, avoiding
the clerks' room, and so down stairs.

'Drive to the courts,' said the attorney to the coachman; and that was
all Toole learned about it that day. So he mounted his nag, and resumed
his journey to Ringsend at a brisk trot.

I suppose, when he turned the key in his door, and dropped it into his
breeches' pocket, the gentleman attorney assumed that he had made
everything perfectly safe in his private chamber, though Toole thought
he had not looked quite the same again after that sudden change of
countenance he had remarked.

Now, it was a darksome day, and the windows of Mr. Gamble's room were so
obscured with cobwebs, dust, and dirt, that even on a sunny day they
boasted no more than a dim religious light. But on this day a cheerful
man would have asked for a pair of candles, to dissipate the twilight
and sustain his spirits.

He had not been gone, and the room empty ten minutes, when the door
through which he had seemed to look on that unknown something that
dismayed him, opened softly--at first a little--then a little more--then
came a knock at it--then it opened more, and the dark shape of Charles
Nutter, with rigid features and white eye-balls, glided stealthily and
crouching into the chamber, and halted at the table, and seemed to read
the endorsements of the notices that lay there.










Now, Father Roach's domicile was the first house in the Chapel-lane,
which consisted altogether of two, not being very long. It showed a
hall-door, painted green--the national hue--which enclosed, I'm happy to
say, not a few of the national virtues, chief among which reigned
hospitality. As Moggy turned the corner, and got out of the cold wind
under its friendly shelter, she heard a stentorian voice, accompanied by
the mellifluous drone of a bagpipe, concluding in a highly decorative
style the last verse of the 'Colleen Rue.'

Respect for this celestial melody, and a desire to hear a little more of
what might follow, held Moggy on the steps, with the knocker between her
finger and thumb, unwilling to disturb by an unseasonable summons the
harmonies from which she was, in fact, separated only by the thickness
of the window and its shutter. And when the vocal and instrumental music
came to an end together with a prolonged and indescribable groan and a
grunt from the songster and the instrument, there broke forth a shrilly
chorus of female cackle, some in admiration and some in laughter; and
the voice of Father Roach was heard lustily and melodiously ejaculating
'More power to you, Pat Mahony!'

As this pleasant party all talked together, and Moggy could not clearly
unravel a single sentence, she made up her mind to wait no longer, and
knocked with good emphasis, under cover of the uproar.

The maid, who had evidently been in the hall, almost instantaneously
opened the door; and with a hasty welcome full of giggle and excitement,
pulled in Moggy by the arm, shutting the door after her; and each damsel
asked the other, 'An' how are you, and are you elegant?' and shaking her
neighbour by both hands. The clerical handmaid, in a galloping whisper
in Moggy's ear, told her,' 'Twas a weddin' party, and such tarin' fun
she never see--sich dancin' and singin', and laughin' and funnin'; and
she must wait a bit, and see the quality,' a portion of whom, indeed,
were visible as well as over-poweringly audible, through the half-open
door of the front parlour; 'and there was to be a thunderin' fine
supper--a round of beef and two geese, and a tubful of oysters,' &c, &c.

Now I must mention that this feast was, in fact, in its own way, more
romantically wonderful than that of the celebrated wedding of Camacho
the Rich, and one of the many hundred proofs I've met with in the course
of my long pilgrimage that the honest prose of everyday life is often
ten times more surprising than the unsubstantial fictions of even the
best epic poets.

The valiant Sir Jaufry, it is true, was ordered to a dungeon by the fair
Brunissende, who so soon as she beheld him, nevertheless became
enamoured of the knight, and gave him finally her hand in wedlock. But
if the fair Brunissende had been five and forty, or by'r lady, fifty,
the widow of a tailor, herself wondrous keen after money, and stung very
nigh to madness by the preposterous balance due (as per ledger), and the
inexhaustible and ingenious dodges executed by the insolvent Sir Jaufry,
the composer of that chivalric romance might have shrunk from the happy
winding-up as bordering too nearly upon the incredible.

Yet good Father Roach understood human nature better. Man and woman have
a tendency to fuse. And given a good-looking fellow and a woman, no
matter of what age, who but deserves the name, and bring them together,
and let the hero but have proper opportunities, and deuce is in it if
nothing comes of the matter. Animosity is no impediment. On the contrary
'tis a more advantageous opening than indifference. The Cid began his
courtship by shooting his lady-love's pigeons, and putting her into a
pet and a frenzy. The Cid knew what he was about. Stir no matter what
passions, provided they be passions, and get your image well into your
lady's head, and you may repeat, with like success, the wooing (which
superficial people pronounce so unnatural) of crook-backed Richard and
the Lady Anne. Of course, there are limits. I would not advise, for
instance, a fat elderly gentleman, bald, carbuncled, dull of wit, and
slow of speech, to hazard that particular method, lest he should find
himself the worse of his experiment. My counsel is for the young, the
tolerably good-looking, for murmuring orators of the silver-tongue
family, and romantic athletes with coaxing ways.

Worthy Father Roach constituted himself internuncio between Mahony, whom
we remember first in his pride of place doing the honours of that feast
of Mars in which his 'friend' Nutter was to have carved up the great
O'Flaherty on the Fifteen Acres, and next, quantum, mutatus ab illo! a
helpless but manly captive in the hands of the Dublin bailiffs, and that
very Mrs. Elizabeth Woolly, relict and sole executrix of the late
Timotheus Woolly, of High-street, tailor, &c., &c., who was the cruel
cause of his incarceration.

Good Father Roach, though a paragon of celibacy, was of a gallant
temperament, and a wheedling tongue, and unfolded before the offended
eye of the insulted and vindictive executrix so interesting a picture of
'his noble young friend, the victim of circumstance, breaking his manly
heart over his follies and misfortunes;' and looking upon her, Mrs.
Woolly, afar off, with an eye full of melancholy and awe, tempered with,
mayhap, somewhat of romantic gallantry, like Sir Walter Raleigh from the
Tower window on Queen Elizabeth, that he at length persuaded the
tremendous 'relict' to visit her captive in his dungeon. This she did,
in a severe mood, with her attorney, and good Father Roach; and though
Mahony's statement was declamatory rather than precise, and dealt more
with his feelings than his resources, and was carried on more in the way
of an appeal to the 'leedy' than as an exposition to the man of law,
leaving matters at the end in certainly no clearer state than before he
began, yet the executrix consented to see the imprisoned youth once
more, this time dispensing with her attorney's attendance, and content
with the protection of the priest, and even upon that, on some
subsequent visits, she did not insist.

And so the affair, like one of those medleys of our Irish melodies
arranged by poor M. Jullien, starting with a martial air, breathing turf
and thunder, fire and sword, went off imperceptibly into a pathetic and
amorous strain. Father Roach, still officiating as internuncio, found
the dowager less and less impracticable, and at length a treaty was
happily concluded. The captive came forth to wear thenceforward those
lighter chains only, which are forged by Hymen and wreathed with roses;
and the lady applied to his old promissory notes the torch of love,
which in a moment reduced them to ashes. And here, at the hermitage of
our jolly Chapelizod priest--for bride and bridegroom were alike of the
'ancient faith'--the treaty was ratified, and the bagpipe and the
bridegroom, in tremendous unison, splitting the rafters with 'Hymen,
Hymen, O Hymenoee!'

In the midst of this festive celebration, his reverence was summoned to
the hall, already perfumed with the incense of the geese, the onions,
the bacon browned at the kitchen-fire, and various other delicacies,
toned and enriched by the vapours that exhaled from the little bottle of
punch which, in consideration of his fatigues, stood by the elbow of the
piper.

When the holy man had heard Moggy's tale, he scratched his tonsure and
looked, I must say, confoundedly bored.

'Now, Moggy, my child, don't you see, acushla, 'tisn't to me you should
ha' come; I'm here, my dear, engaged,' and he dried his moist and
rubicund countenance, 'in one of the sacred offices iv the Church, the
sacrament, my dear, iv'--here Mahony and the piper struck up again in so
loud a key in the parlour, that as Moggy afterwards observed, 'they
could not hear their own ears,' and the conclusion of the sentence was
overwhelmed in, 'Many's the bottle I cracked in my time.' So his
reverence impatiently beckoned to the hall-door, which he opened, and on
the steps, where he was able to make himself audible, he explained the
nature of his present engagement, and referred her to Doctor Toole.
Assured, however, that he was in Dublin, he scratched his tonsure once
more.

'The divil burn the lot o' them, my dear, an' purty evenin' they chose
for their vagaries--an' law papers too, you say, an' an attorney into
the bargain--there's no influence you can bring to bear on them
fellows. If 'twas another man, an' a couple more at his back, myself an'
Pat Moran 'id wallop them out of the house, an' into the river, be
gannies; as aisy as say an ave.'

The illustration, it occurred to him, might possibly strike Moggy as
irreverent, and the worthy father paused, and, with upturned eyes,
murmured a Latin ejaculation, crossing himself; and having thus
reasserted his clerical character, he proceeded to demonstrate the
uselessness of his going.

But Father Roach, though sometimes a little bit testy, and, on the
whole, not without faults, was as good-natured an anchorite as ever said
mass or brewed a contemplative bowl of punch. If he refused to go down
to the Mills, he would not have been comfortable again that night, nor
indeed for a week to come. So, with a sigh, he made up his mind, got
quietly into his surtout and mufflers which hung on the peg behind the
hall-door, clapped on his hat, grasped his stout oak stick, and telling
his housekeeper to let them know, in case his guests should miss him,
that he was obliged to go out for ten minutes or so on parish business,
forth sallied the stout priest, with no great appetite for
knight-errantry, but still anxious to rescue, if so it might be, the
distressed princess, begirt with giants and enchanters, at the Mills.

At the Salmon House he enlisted the stalworth Paddy Moran, with the
information conveyed to that surprised reveller, that he was to sleep at
'Mrs. Nutter's house' that night; and so, at a brisk pace, the clerical
knight, his squire, and demoiselle-errant, proceeded to the Mills.








 DANGERFIELD RECEIVES A VISITOR, AND MAKES A CALL.


Dangerfield walked out and blandly greeted the visitor, who turned out
to be Mr. Justice Lowe.

'I give you good-morning, Sir; pray, alight and step in. Hallo, Doolan,
take Mr. Justice Lowe's horse.'

So Mr. Lowe thanked him, in his cold way, and bowing, strode into the
Brass Castle; and after the customary civilities, sat himself down, and
says he--

'I've been at the Crown Office, Sir, about this murder, we may call
it, upon Sturk, and I told them you could throw a light, as I thought,
on the matter.'

'As how, Sir?'

'Why, regarding the kind of feeling that subsisted between the prisoner,
Nutter, and Doctor Sturk.'

''Tis unpleasant, Sir, but I can't object.'

'There was an angry feeling about the agency, I believe? Lord
Castlemallard's agency, eh?' continued Lowe.

'Well, I suppose it was that; there certainly was an unpleasant
feeling--very unpleasant.'

'You've heard him express it?'

'Yes; I think most gentlemen who know him have. Why, he made no disguise
of it; he was no great talker, but we've heard him on that subject.'

'But you specially know how it stood between them in respect of the
agency?'

'Yes.'

'Very good, Sir,' said Lowe.

'And I've a notion that something decisive should be done toward
effecting a full discovery, and I'll consider of a method,' replied
Dangerfield.

'How do you mean?' said Lowe, looking up with a glance like a hawk.

'How! why I'll talk it over with Mrs. Sturk this evening.'

'Why, what has she got to tell?'

'Nothing, as I suppose; I'll see her to-day; there's nothing to tell;
but something, I think, to be done; it hasn't been set about rightly;
'tis a botched business hitherto--that's in my judgment.'

'Yet 'tis rather a strong case,' answered Mr. Lowe, superciliously.

'Rather a strong case, so it is, but I'll clench it, Sir; it ought to be
certain.'

'Well, Sir?' said Lowe, who expected to hear more.

'Yes,' said Dangerfield, briskly, ''twill depend on her; I'll suggest,
she'll decide.'

'And why she, Sir?' said Lowe sharply.

'Because 'tis her business and her right, and no one else can,' answered
Dangerfield just as tartly, with his hands in his breeches' pockets, and
his head the least thing o' one side, and then with a bow, 'won't you
drink a glass of wine, Sir?' which was as much as to say, you'll get no
more from me.

'I thank you, Sir, no; 'tis a little too early for me.' And so with the
usual ceremonies, Mr. Lowe departed, the governor of the Brass Castle
walking beside his horse, as far as the iron gate, to do him honour; and
as he rode away towards Lucan, Mr. Dangerfield followed him with a snowy
smirk.

Then briskly, after his wont, the knight of the shining spectacles made
his natty toilet; and in a few minutes his cocked hat was seen gliding
along the hedge toward Chapelizod.

He glanced up at Sturk's window--it was a habit now--so soon as he came
in sight, but all looked as usual. So he mounted the steps, and asked to
see Mrs. Sturk.

'My dear Madam,' said he, after due courtesies interchanged, 'I've but a
few minutes; my horse waits yonder at the Phoenix, and I'm away to
town. How does your patient to-day?'

'Oh, mighty well--wonderful--that is considering how cold the weather
is. The doctor says he's lower, indeed, but I don't mind that, for he
must be lower while the cold continues; I always say that; and I judge
very much by the eye; don't you, Mr. Dangerfield? by his looks, you
know; they can't deceive me, and I assure you--'

'Your house is quiet; are the children out, Ma'am?'

'Oh, yes, with Mag in the park.'

'Perhaps, Ma'am, you'd let me see him?'

'See him?'

'Yes, look on him, Ma'am, only for a moment you know.'

She looked very much surprised, and perhaps a little curious and
frightened.

'I hope you haven't heard he's worse, Mr. Dangerfield. Oh, Sir, sure you
haven't?'

'No, Madam, on my honour, except from yourself, I've heard nothing of
him to-day; but I'd like to see him, and speak a word to you, with your
permission.'

So Mrs. Sturk led the way up stairs, whispering as she ascended; for she
had always the fancy in her head that her Barney was in a sweet light
sleep, from which he was on no account to be awakened, forgetting, or
not clearly knowing, that all the ordnance in the barrack-yard over the
way had not voice enough to call him up from that dread slumber.

'You may go down, my dear,' said Mr. Dangerfield to the little girl, who
rose silently from the chair as they entered; 'with your permission,
Mistress Sturk--I say, child, you may run down,' and he smiled a
playful, sinister smile, with a little wave of his finger toward the
door. So she courtesied and vanished obediently.

Then he drew the curtain, and looked on Doctor Sturk. There lay the hero
of the tragedy, his smashed head strapped together with
sticking-plaster, and a great white fold of fine linen, like a fantastic
turban, surmounting his grim yellow features.

Then he slipped his fingers under the coverlet, and took his hand; a
strange greeting that! But it was his pulse he wanted, and when he had
felt it for a while--

'Psha!' said he in a whisper--for the semblance of sleep affected
everyone alike--'his pulse is just gone. Now, Madam, listen to me.
There's not a soul in Chapelizod but yourself who does not know his
wounds are mortal--he's dying, Ma'am.'

'Oh--oh--o--o--oh, Mr. Dangerfield, you don't--you don't think so,'
wildly cried the poor little lady, growing quite white with terror and
agony.

'Now, pray, my dear Mistress Sturk, compose yourself, and hear me out:
'Tis my belief he has a chance; but none, absolutely no chance, Madam,
unless my advice be taken. There's not an evening, Ma'am, I meet Doctor
Toole at the club, but I hear the same report--a little lower--always
the same--lower--sinking--and no hope.'

Here Mrs. Sturk broke out again.

'Now, Madam,' I protest you'll make me regret my visit, unless you
please to command yourself. While the doctors who are about him have got
him in hands, there's neither hope for his life, nor for his recovering,
for one moment, the use of his speech. Pray, Madam, hear me. They state
as much themselves. Now, Madam, I say, we must have a chance for his
life, and if that fails, a chance for his speech. The latter, Madam, is
of more consequence than, perhaps, you are aware.'

Poor little Mrs. Sturk was looking very pale, and breathing very hard,
with her hand pressed to her heart.

'I've done what I could, you know, to see my way through his affairs,
and I've succeeded in keeping his creditors quiet.'

At this point poor Mrs. Sturk broke out--

'Oh! may the Father of the fatherless, if such they are to be bless and
reward--oh--oh--ho--ho, Mr. Dangerfield--oh--oh-oh--Sir.'

'Now, pray, Madam, oblige me and be tranquil. I say, Madam, his affairs,
I suspect, are by no means in so bad a case as we at first supposed, and
he has got, or I'm mistaken, large sums out, but where, neither I nor
you can tell. Give him five minutes' speech, and it may be worth a
thousand pounds to you--well, not to you, if you will, but to his
children. And again, Madam, 'tis of the utmost importance that
he should be able to state who was the villain who struck
him--Charles--a--Charles--Mr. Nutter--you know, Madam.'

'Oh! that dreadful--dreadful man--may Heaven forgive him. Oh, my Barney!
look at him there--he'd forgive him if he could speak. You would, my
blessed Barney--you would.'

'To be sure he would. But see, Ma'am, the importance of having his
evidence to settle the fact. Well, I know that he would not like to hang
anybody. But suppose, Ma'am, Charles Nutter is innocent, don't you think
he'd like to acquit him? ay, you do. Well, Ma'am, 'tis due to the
public, you see, and to his children that he should have a chance of
recovering his speech, and to common humanity that he should have a
chance for his life--eh? and neither will the doctors who have him
in hands allow him. Now, Madam, there's a simple operation, called
trepanning, you have heard of it, which would afford him such a chance,
but fearing its failure they won't try it, although they allege that
without it he must die, d'ye see?--ay, die he must, without a cast
for his life if you won't try it.'

And so, by harping on the alternatives, and demonstrating the prudence,
humanity, and duty of action, and the inevitably fatal consequences of
the other course, he wrought upon her at last to write a note to Surgeon
Dillon to come out on the evening following, and to perform the
operation. The dreadful word 'to-day,' the poor little woman could not
abide. She pleaded for a respite, and so, half-distracted, fixed
to-morrow.

'I hope, my dear Madam, you've some little confidence in me. I think I
have shown an interest, and I've striven to be of use.'

'Oh, Sir, Mr. Dangerfield, you've been too good, our guardian angel; but
for you, Sir, we should not have had a roof over our heads, or a bed to
lie on; oh! may--'

'Well, Ma'am, you please to speak too highly of my small services; but I
would plead them, humble as they are, as a claim on your confidence, and
having decided upon this wise and necessary course, pray do not say a
word about it to anybody but myself. I will go to town, and arrange for
the doctor's visit, and you'll soon, I hope, have real grounds for
gratitude, not to me, Ma'am, but to Heaven.'





 PAUL DANGERFIELD PAYS HIS RESPECTS AND COMPLIMENTS AT
BELMONT; WHERE OTHER VISITORS ALSO PRESENT THEMSELVES.


Before going to town, Mr. Dangerfield, riding over the bridge and up the
Palmerstown-road, dismounted at Belmont door-steps, and asked for the
general. He was out. Then for Miss Rebecca Chattesworth. Yes, she was in
the withdrawing-room. And so, light, white, and wiry, he ascended the
stairs swiftly.

'Mr. Dangerfield,' cried Dominick, throwing open the door; and that
elderly and ill-starred wooer glided in thereat.

'Madam, your most humble servant.'

'Oh! Mr. Dangerfield? You're very welcome, Sir,' said Aunt Becky, with a
grand courtesy, and extending her thin jewelled hand, which he took
gallantly, with another bow, and a smile, and a flash from his
spectacles.

Aunt Becky laid down her volume of Richardson. She was quite alone,
except for her little monkey--Goblin--with a silver hoop about his
waist, and a chain thereto attached; two King Charles's dogs, whose
barking subsided after a while; and one gray parrot on a perch in the
bow-window, who happily was not in a very chatty mood just then. So the
human animals were able to edge in a sentence easily enough. And Mr.
Dangerfield said--

'I'm happy in having found you, Madam; for whatever be my
disappointments else, to Miss Rebecca Chattesworth at least I owe a debt
of gratitude, which, despairing to repay it, I can only acknowledge; and
leaving unacknowledged, I should have departed from Ireland most
unhappily.'

'What a fop! what a fop,' said the parrot.

'You rate my poor wishes too highly, Mr. Dangerfield. I over-estimated,
myself, my influence with the young lady; but why speak of your
departure, Sir, so soon? A little time may yet work a change.'

'You lie, you dog! you lie, you lie, you lie,' said the parrot.

'Madam,' said he with a shake of his head, ''tis hoping against hope.
Time will add to my wrinkles without softening her aversion. I
utterly despair. While there remained one spark of hope I should never
have dreamed of leaving Chapelizod.'

Here there was a considerable pause, during which the parrot
occasionally repeated, 'You lie, you lie--you dog--you lie.'

'Of course, Sir, if the chance be not worth waiting for, you do well to
be gone wherever your business or your pleasures, Sir, invite you,' said
Aunt Becky, a little loftily.

'What a fop!' said the parrot. 'You lie, you dog!'

'Neither business, Madam, nor pleasures invite me. My situation here has
been most distressing. So long as hope cheered me, I little regarded
what might be said or thought; but I tell you honestly that hope is
extinguished; and it has grown to me intolerable longer to remain in
sight of that treasure for which I cannot cease to wish, and which I
never can possess. I've grown, Madam, to detest the place.'

Aunt Becky, with her head very high, adjusted in silence, the two China
mandarins on the mantelpiece--first, one very carefully, then the other.
And there was a pause, during which one of the lap-dogs screamed; and
the monkey, who had boxed his ears, jumped, with a ringing of his chain,
chattering, on the back of the arm-chair in which the grim suitor sat.
Mr. Dangerfield would have given the brute a slap in the face, but that
he knew how that would affect Miss Rebecca Chattesworth.

'So, Madam,' said he, standing up abruptly, 'I am here to thank you most
gratefully for the countenance given to my poor suit, which, here and
now, at last and for ever, I forego. I shall leave for England so soon
as my business will allow; and as I made no secret of my suit, so I
shall make none of the reasons of my departure. I'm an outspoken man,
Madam; and as the world knew my hopes, I shall offer them no false
excuses for my departure; but lift my hat, and bow to fortune--a
defeated man.'

'Avez-vous dinÃ© mon petit coquin?' said the parrot.

'Well, Sir, I will not altogether deny you have reason for what you
design; and it may be, 'tis as well to bring the matter to a close,
though your resolution has taken me by surprise. She hath shown herself
so perverse in this respect, that I allow I see no present likelihood of
a change; and indeed I do not quite understand my niece; and, very like,
she does not comprehend herself.'

Mr. Dangerfield almost smiled one of his grim disconcerting smiles, and
a cynical light played over his face; and the black monkey behind him
grinned and hugged himself like his familiar. The disappointed gentleman
thought he understood Miss Gertrude pretty well.

'I thought,' said Aunt Becky; 'I suspected--did you--a certain young
gentleman in this neighbourhood--'

'As having found his way to the young lady's good graces?' asked
Dangerfield.

'Yes; and I conjecture you know whom I mean,' said Aunt Rebecca.

'Who--pray, Madam?' he demanded.

'Why, Lieutenant Puddock,' said Aunt Becky, again adjusting the china on
the chimneypiece.

'Eh?--truly?--that did not strike me,' replied Dangerfield.

He had a disconcerting way of saying the most ordinary things, and there
was a sort of latent meaning, like a half-heard echo, underrunning the
surface of his talk, which sometimes made people undefinably
uncomfortable; and Aunt Becky looked a little stately and flushed; but
in a minute more the conversation proceeded.

'I have many regrets, Miss Chattesworth, in leaving this place. The loss
of your society--don't mistake me, I never flatter--is a chief one. Some
of your views and plans interested me much. I shall see my Lord
Castlemallard sooner than I should had my wishes prospered; and I will
do all in my power to engage him to give the site for the building, and
stones from the quarry free; and I hope, though no longer a resident
here, you will permit me to contribute fifty pounds towards the
undertaking.'

'Sir, I wish there were more gentlemen of your public spirit and
Christian benevolence,' cried Aunt Becky, very cordially; 'and I have
heard of all your goodness to that unhappy family of Doctor
Sturk's--poor wretched man!'

'A bagatelle, Madam,' said Dangerfield, shaking his head and waving his
hand slightly; 'but I hope to do them, or at least the public, a service
of some importance, by bringing conviction home to the assassin who
struck him down, and that in terms so clear and authentic, as will leave
no room for doubt in the minds of any; and to this end I'm resolved to
stick at no trifling sacrifice, and, rather than fail, I'll drain my
purse.'

'Mon petit coquin!' prattled the parrot in the bow-window.

'And, Madam,' said he, after he had risen to take his leave, 'as I
before said, I'm a plain man. I mean, so soon as I can wind my business
up, to leave this place and country--I would to-night, if I could; but
less, I fear, than some days--perhaps a week will not suffice. When I'm
gone, Madam, I beg you'll exercise no reserve respecting the cause of my
somewhat abrupt departure; I could easily make a pretext of something
else; but the truth, Madam, is easiest as well as best to be told; I
protracted my stay so long as hope continued. Now my suit is ended. I
can no longer endure the place. The remembrance of your kindness only,
sweetens the bitterness of my regret, and that I shall bear with me so
long, Madam, as life remains.'

And saying this, as Mr. Richardson writes, 'he bowed upon her passive
hand,' and Miss Rebecca made him a grand and gracious courtesy.

As he retreated, whom should Dominick announce but Captain Cluffe and
Lieutenant Puddock. And there was an odd smile on Mr. Dangerfield's
visage, as he slightly acknowledged them in passing, which Aunt Rebecca
somehow did not like.

So Aunt Becky's levee went on; and as Homer, in our school-boy ear, sang
the mournful truth, that 'as are the generations of the forest leaves so
are the succession of men,' the Dangerfield efflorescence had no sooner
disappeared, and that dry leaf whisked away down the stairs, than
Cluffe and Puddock budded forth and bloomed in his place, in the
sunshine of Aunt Rebecca's splendid presence.

Cluffe, in virtue of his rank and pretensions, marched in the van, and,
as Aunt Becky received him, little Puddock's round eyes swept the room
in search, perhaps, of some absent object.

'The general's not here,' said Aunt Becky loftily and severely,
interpreting Puddock's wandering glance in that way. 'Your visit,
perhaps, is for him--you'll find him in his study, with the orderly.'

'My visit, Madam,' said Puddock, with a slight blush, 'was intended for
you, Madam--not for the general, whom I had the honour of seeing this
morning on parade.'

'Oh! for me? I thank you,' said Aunt Rebecca, with a rather dry
acknowledgment. And so she turned and chatted with Cluffe, who, not
being at liberty to talk upon his usual theme--his poor, unhappy friend,
Puddock, and his disgraces--was eloquent upon the monkey, and sweet upon
the lap-dogs, and laughed till he grew purple at the humours of the
parrot, and swore, as gentlemen then swore, 'twas a conjuror, a wonder,
and as good as a play. While this entertaining conversation was going
on, there came a horrid screech and a long succession of yelps from the
court-yard.

'Good gracious mercy,' cried Aunt Rebecca, sailing rapidly to the
window, ''tis Flora's voice. Sweet creature, have they killed you--my
angel; what is it?--where are you, sweetheart?--where can she be?
Oh, dear--oh, dear!'--and she looked this way and that in her
distraction.

But the squeak subsided, and Flora was not to be seen; and Aunt Becky's
presence of mind returned, and she said--

'Captain Cluffe, 'tis a great liberty; but you're humane--and, besides,
I know that you would readily do me a kindness.' That emphasis was
shot at poor Puddock. 'And may I pray you to try on the steps if you can
see the dear animal, anywhere--you know Flora?'

'Know her?--oh dear, yes,' cried Cluffe with alacrity, who, however, did
not, but relied on her answering to her name, which he bawled lustily
from the door-steps and about the court-yard, with many terms of
endearment, intended for Aunt Becky's ear, in the drawing-room.

Little Puddock, who was hurt at that lady's continued severity, was
desirous of speaking; for he liked Aunt Becky, and his heart swelled
within him at her injustice; but though he hemmed once or twice, somehow
the exordium was not ready, and his feelings could not find a tongue.

Aunt Becky looked steadfastly from the window for a while, and then
sailed majestically toward the door, which the little ensign, with an
humble and somewhat frightened countenance, hastened to open.

'Pray, Sir, don't let me trouble you,' said Aunt Becky, in her high,
cold way.

'Madam, 'tis no trouble--it would be a happiness to me, Madam, to serve
you in any way you would permit; but 'tis a trouble to me, Madam,
indeed, that you leave the room, and a greater trouble,' said little
Puddock, waxing fluent as he proceeded, 'that I have incurred your
displeasure--indeed, Madam, I know not how--your goodness to me, Madam,
in my sickness, I never can forget.'

'You can forget, Sir--you have forgot. Though, indeed, Sir, there
was little to remember, I--I'm glad you thought me kind, Sir. I--I wish
you well, Sir,' said Aunt Becky. She was looking down and a little pale,
and in her accents something hurried and almost sad. 'And as for my
displeasure, Sir, who said I was displeased? And if I were, what could
my displeasure be to you? No, Sir,' she went on almost fiercely, and
with a little stamp on the floor, 'you don't care; and why should
you?--you've proved it--you don't, Lieutenant Puddock, and you never
did.'

And, without waiting for an answer, Aunt Becky flashed out of the room,
and up stairs to her chamber, the door of which she slammed fiercely;
and Gertrude, who was writing a letter in her own chamber, heard her
turn the key hastily in the lock.

When Cluffe, who for some time continued to exercise his lungs in
persuasive invitations to Flora, at last gave over the pursuit, and
returned to the drawing-room, to suggest that the goddess in question
had probably retreated to the kitchen, he was a good deal chagrined to
find the drawing-room 'untreasured of its mistress.'

Puddock looked a good deal put out, and his explanation was none of the
clearest; and he could not at all say that the lady was coming back.

'I think, Lieutenant Puddock,' said Cluffe, who was much displeased, and
had come to regard Aunt Rebecca very much as under his especial
protection, 'it might have been better we hadn't called here. I--you
see--you're not--you see it yourself--you've offended Miss Rebecca
Chattesworth somehow, and I'm afraid you've not mended matters while I
was down stairs bawling after that cursed--that--the--little dog, you
know. And--and for my part, I'm devilish sorry I came, Sir.'

This was said after a wait of nearly ten minutes, which appeared at
least twice as long.

'I'm sorry, Sir, I embarrassed you with the disadvantage of my company,'
answered little Puddock, with dignity.

'Why, 'tisn't that, you know,' rejoined Cluffe, in a patronising 'my
good-fellow' sort of way; 'you know I always liked your company devilish
well. But where's the good of putting one's self in the way of being
thought de trop--don't you see--by other people--and annoyed in this
way--and--you--you don't know the world, Puddock--you'd much better
leave yourself in any hands, d'ye see; and so, I suppose, we may as well
be off now--'tis no use waiting longer.'

And discontentedly and lingeringly the gallant captain, followed by
Puddock, withdrew himself--pausing to caress the wolf-dog at the corner
of the court-yard, and loitering as long as it was decent in the avenue.

All this time Miss Gertrude Chattesworth, like her more mature relative,
was in the quiet precincts of her chamber. She, too, had locked her
door, and, with throbbing temples and pale face, was writing a letter,
from which I take the liberty of printing a few scarcely coherent
passages.

       *       *       *       *       *

'I saw you on Sunday--for near two hours--may Heaven forgive me,
thinking of little else than you. And, oh! what would I not have given
to speak, were it but ten words to you? When is my miserable probation
to end? Why is this perverse mystery persisted in? I sometimes lose all
hope in my destiny, and well-nigh all trust in you. I feel that I am a
deceiver, and cannot bear it. I assure you, on my sacred honour, I
believe there is nothing gained by all this--oh! forgive the
word--deception. How or when is it to terminate?--what do you
purpose?--why does the clerk's absence from the town cause you so much
uneasiness--is there any danger you have not disclosed? A friend told me
that you were making preparations to leave Chapelizod and return to
England. I think I was on the point of fainting when I heard it. I
almost regret I did not, as the secret would thus have been discovered,
and my emancipation accomplished. How have you acquired this strange
influence over me, to make me so deceive those in whom I should most
naturally confide? I am persuaded they believe I really recoil from you.
And what is this new business of Doctor Sturk? I am distracted with
uncertainties and fears. I hear so little, and imperfectly from you, I
cannot tell from your dark hints whether some new danger lurks in those
unlooked-for quarters. I know not what magic binds me so to you, to
endure the misery of this strange deceitful mystery--but you are all
mystery; and yet be not--you cannot be--my evil genius. You will not
condemn me longer to a wretchedness that must destroy me. I conjure you,
declare yourself. What have we to fear? I will brave all--anything
rather than darkness, suspense, and the consciousness of a continual
dissimulation. Declare yourself, I implore of you, and be my angel of
light and deliverance.'

There is a vast deal more, but this sample is quite enough; and when the
letter was finished, she signed it--
               'Your most unhappy and too-faithful,
                                             'GERTRUDE'.

And having sealed it, she leaned her anxious head upon her hand, and
sighed heavily.

She knew very well by what means to send it; and the letter awaited at
his house him for whom it was intended on his return that evening.









This evening Lily Walsingham was early tired and very weak, Sally
thought, and more glad than usual to lie down in her bed; and there her
old and loving nurse fancied that she looked a little strange, and that
her thoughts sometimes wandered.

She lay very quietly for a good while, and suddenly, with a beautiful
look, and in a clear, glad voice, she said--

'Mother!'

And old Sally said--

'There's no one, dear Miss Lily, but me.'

But she was looking earnestly, and, with a wrapt smile, only said--

'Oh!'

She thought she saw her, I believe.

Are these always illusions? Or is it only that, as the twilight deepens,
and the shapes of earth melt into night, the stars of heaven,
changeless and serene, reveal themselves, and shine out to the darkened
eyes of mortals?

As Aunt Becky sat that night in the drawing-room with her niece, a maid,
with a whisper, placed a little note in Miss Gertrude's hand. There was
a little pause.

'Oh! aunt--oh!' and she looked so terrified. 'Oh! aunt,' and she threw
her arms round her aunt's neck, and began crying wildly. 'Poor Lily's
gone--there's the note.'

Then arose the wild wailing of unavailing grief, and sobs, mixed with
early recollections of childhood, and all poor Lily's sweet traits
poured out.

Old Aunt Rebecca took the note. Her stoicism was the point on which she
piqued herself most. She looked very pale, and she told her niece to be
composed; for Aunt Becky had a theory that feelings ought to be
commanded, and that it only needed effort and resolution. So she read
the note, holding her head very high, but the muscles of her face were
quivering.

'Oh! Gertrude, if ever there was an angel--and the poor desolate old
man----'

The theory broke down, and old Aunt Rebecca cried and sat down, and
cried heartily, and went and put her thin arms round her niece, and
kissed her, and cried, and cried, and kissed her again.

'She was such--such a darling--oh! Gertrude dear, we must never quarrel
any more.'

Death had come so near, and all things less than itself were rebuked in
that sublime presence; and Lily Walsingham was gone; and she who was so
lately their gay companion, all at once so awfully angelic in the
unearthly light of death.

'Who'd ha' thought it was so near, Ma'am,' said the maid; 'the poor
little thing! Though to be sure, Ma'am, a winding sheet came three times
in the candle last night, and I turns it round and picks it off, that
way, with my nail, unknownst to Mrs. Heany, for fear she'd be frettin'
about the little boy that's lyin' at home in the small-pox; and indeed I
thought 'twas for him it was; but man proposes, and God disposes--and
death forgets none, the Lord be praised--and everyone has their hour,
old and young, Ma'am; and as I was sayin', they had no notion or
expectation up at the Elms, Ma'am, she was so bad, the heavens be her
bed this night. 'Twas all in an instant like, Miss, she made as if she'd
sit up, bein' leanin' on pillows--and so she put out them purty little
hands of hers, with a smile, and that was all--the purty
crature--everyone's sorry afther her. The man was cryin' in the hall
that brought the note.'

The poor came to the door, and made their rude and kindly
lamentations--they were all quite sincere--'His reverence was very good,
but he couldn't have the thought, you know.' It was quite
true--'everyone was sorry.' The brave Magnolia's eyes were red, when
she looked out of the window next morning, and jolly little Doctor Toole
said at the club--

'Ah, Sir, she was a bright little thing--a born lady--such a beauty--and
the best little creature. The town might well be proud of her, in every
way, Sir.' And he fell a blubbering; and old Major O'Neill, who was a
quiet and silent officer, cried in a reserved way, looking into the
fire, with his elbow on the mantelpiece. And Toole said, 'I don't know
how I'll pass that house.'

And many felt the same. Little Lily was there no more--and the Elms were
changed--the light and the grace were gone--and they were only dark old
trees now.

And everyone felt a great desire to find some way--any way--to show
their respect and affection for their good old rector. And I'm sure he
understood it--for liking and reverence, one way or another, will tell
their story. The hushed enquiries at the door, and little offers of
useless services made by stealth through the servants, and such like
foolish kindnesses at such a time--the evidence of a great but helpless
sympathy--are sweet as angelic music.

And who should arrive at night, with all his trunks, or at least a
considerable number of them, and his books and rattletraps, but honest,
simple Dan Loftus. The news was true about his young charge. He had died
of fever at Malaga, and Dick Devereux was at last a step, and a long
one--nearer to the title. So Dan was back again in his old garret.
Travel had not educated him in the world's ways. In them he was the same
queer, helpless tyro. And his costume, though he had a few handsome
articles--for, travelling with a sprig of nobility, he thought it but
right and seemed to dress accordingly--was on that account, perhaps,
only more grotesque than ever. But he had acquired mountains of that
lore in which he and good Doctor Walsingham delighted. He had
transcribed old epitaphs and translated interminable extracts from
archives, and bought five Irish manuscripts, all highly illustrative of
that history on which he and the doctor were so pleasantly engaged. It
was too late that night to go up to the Elms; but he longed to unpack
his trunkful of manuscripts, and to expound to his beloved doctor the
treasures he had amassed.

And over his solitary tea-cup and his book the sorrowful news from the
Elms reached him, and all his historical castles in the air were
shivered. In the morning, before the town was stirring, he crossed the
bridge, and knocked softly at the familiar hall-door. Honest old John
Tracy opened it, and Dan shook hands with him, and both cried for a
while quietly.

'How is the honoured master?' at last said Loftus.

'He's there in the study, Sir. Thank God, you're come, Sir. I'm sure
he'd like to see you--I'll ask him.'

Dan went into the drawing-room. He looked out at the flowers, and then
at the harpsichord, and on her little walnut table, where her
work-basket lay, and her thimble, and the little coral necklace--a
childish treasure that she used to wear when she was quite a little
thing. It was like a dream; and everything seemed to say--'Poor little
Lily!'

So old John came in, and 'Sir,' said he, 'the master will be glad to see
you.' And Dan Loftus found himself in the study; and the good doctor and
he wrung one another's hands for a long time.

'Oh, Dan--Dan--she's gone--little Lily.'

'You'll see her again, Sir--oh, you'll see her again.'

'Oh, Dan! Dan! Till the heavens be no more they shall not awake, nor be
raised out of their sleep. Oh, Dan, a day's so long--how am I to get
over the time?'

'The loving Lord, Sir, will find a way.'

'But, oh! was there no pitying angel to stay the blow--to plead for a
few years more of life? I deserved it--oh, Dan, yes!--I know it--I
deserved it. But, oh! could not the avenger have pierced me, without
smiting my innocent darling?'

'Oh! she was taken in love, not in judgment, Sir--my pastor--but in
love. It was the voice of the Redeemer that called her.'

And honest Dan repeated, through his sobs, a verse of that 'Song of
Songs,' which little Lily had loved so well--

'My well-beloved spake, and said unto me: Arise, my love, my fair one,
and come thy way.'

The old man bowed his sorrowful head listening.

'You never saw anything so beautiful,' said he after a while. 'I think,
Dan, I could look at her for ever. I don't think it was partiality, but
it seems to me there never was--I never saw a creature like her.'

'Oh, noble! noble!' sobbed poor Dan.

The doctor took him by the arm, and so into the solemn room.

'I think you'd like to see her, Dan?'

'I would--I would indeed, Sir.'

And there was little Lily, never so like the lily before. Poor old Sally
had laid early spring flowers on the white coverlet. A snow-drop lay by
her pale little finger and thumb, just like a flower that has fallen
from a child's hand it its sleep. He looked, at her--the white angelic
apparition--a smile, or a light upon the face.

'Oh, my darling, my young darling, gone--"He is not a man as I am, that
I should answer him."'

But poor Dan, loudly crying, repeated the noble words of Paul, that have
spoken down to us through the sorrows of nigh two thousand years--

'For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and
the dead in Christ shall rise first.'

And so there was a little pause, and the old man said--

'It was very good of you to come to me, my good young friend, in my
helplessness and shipwreck, for the Lord hath hid himself from me; but
he speaks to his desolate creature, my good Dan, through your gracious
lips. My faith!--I thought I had faith till it was brought to the test,
and then it failed! But my good friend, Loftus, was sent to help me--to
strengthen the feeble knees.'

And Dan answered, crying bitterly, and clasping the rector's hand in
both of his--

'Oh, my master, all that ever I knew of good, I learned from you, my
pastor, my benefactor.'

So, with a long, last look, Dan followed the old man to the study, and
they talked long there together, and then went out into the lonely
garden, and paced its walks side by side, up and down.





 DANGERFIELD MEETS AN
OLD FRIEND AFTER DINNER.


'On the night when this great sorrow visited the Elms, Captain Richard
Devereux, who had heard nothing of it, was strangely saddened and
disturbed in mind. They say that a distant death is sometimes felt like
the shadow and chill of a passing iceberg; and if this ominous feeling
crosses a mind already saddened and embittered, it overcasts it with a
feeling akin to despair.

Mrs. Irons knocked at his door, and with the eagerness of a messenger of
news, opened it without awaiting his answer.

'Oh, captain, jewel, do you know what? There's poor Miss Lily
Walsingham; and what do you think but she's dead--the poor little thing;
gone to-night, Sir--not half an hour ago.'

He staggered a little, and put his hand toward his sword, like a man
struck by a robber, and looked at her with a blank stare. She thought he
was out of his mind, and was frightened.

''Tis only me, Sir, Mrs. Irons.'

'A--thank you;' and he walked towards the chimney, and then towards the
door, like a man looking for something; and on a sudden clasping his
forehead in his hands, he cried a wild and terrible appeal to the Maker
and Judge of all things.

''Tis impossible--oh, no--oh, no--it's not true.'

He was in the open air, he could not tell how, and across the bridge,
and before the Elms--a dream--the dark Elms--dark everything.

'Oh, no--it can't be--oh, no--oh, no;' and he went on saying as he
stared on the old house, dark against the sky, 'Oh, no--oh, no.'

Two or three times he would have gone over to the hall-door to make
enquiry, but he sickened at the thought. He clung to that hope, which
was yet not a hope, and he turned and walked quickly down the river's
side by the Inchicore-road. But the anguish of suspense soon drew him
back again; and now his speech was changed, and he said--

'Yes, she's gone--she's gone--oh, she's gone--she's certainly gone.'

He found himself at the drawing-room window that looked into the little
garden at the front of the house, and tapping at the window-pane. He
remembered, all on a sudden--it was like waking--how strange was such a
summons. A little after he saw a light crossing the hall, and he rang
the door-bell. John Tracy opened the door. Yes, it was all true.

The captain was looking very pale, John thought, but otherwise much as
usual. He stared at the old servant for some seconds after he told him
all, but said nothing, not even good-night, and turned away. Old John
was crying; but he called after the captain to take care of the step at
the gate: and as he shut the hall-door his eye caught, by the light of
his candle, a scribbling in red chalk, on the white door-post, and he
stooped to read it, and muttered, 'Them mischievous young blackguards!'
and began rubbing it with the cuff of his coat, his cheek still wet with
tears. For even our grief is volatile; or, rather, it is two tunes that
are in our ears together, the requiem of the organ, and, with it, the
faint hurdy-gurdy jig of our vulgar daily life; and now and then this
latter uppermost.

It was not till he had got nearly across the bridge that Captain
Devereux, as it were, waked up. It was no good waking. He broke forth
into sheer fury. It is not my business to note down the horrors of this
impious frenzy. It was near five o'clock when he came back to his
lodgings; and then, not to rest. To sit down, to rise again, to walk
round the room and round, and stop on a sudden at the window, leaning
his elbows on the sash, with hands clenched together, and teeth set; and
so those demoniac hours of night and solitude wore slowly away, and the
cold gray stole over the east, and Devereux drank a deep draught of his
fiery Lethe, and cast himself down on his bed, and fell at once into a
deep, exhausted lethargy.

When his servant came to his bed-side at seven o'clock, he was lying
motionless, with flushed cheeks, and he could not rouse him. Perhaps it
was well, and saved him from brain-fever or madness.

But after such paroxysms comes often a reaction, a still, stony, awful
despondency. It is only the oscillation between active and passive
despair. Poor Leonora, after she had worked out her fit, tearing 'her
raven hair,' and reviling heaven, was visited in sadder and tenderer
guise by the vision of the past; but with that phantom went down in fear
and isolation to the grave.

This morning several of the neighbours went into Dublin, for the bills
were to be presented against Charles Nutter for a murderous assault,
with intent to kill, made upon the person of Barnabas Sturk, Esq.,
Doctor of Medicine, and Surgeon to the Royal Irish Artillery. As the day
wore on, the honest gossips of Chapelizod looked out anxiously for news.
And everybody who met any one else asked him--'Any news about Nutter,
eh?'--and then they would stop to speculate--and then one would wonder
that Dr. Walsingham's man, Clinton, had not yet returned--and the other
would look at his watch, and say 'twas one o'clock--and then both agreed
that Spaight, at all events, must soon come--for he has appointed two
o'clock for looking at that brood mare of Fagan's.

At last, sure enough, Spaight appeared. Toole, who had been detained by
business in another quarter, had ridden into the town from Leixlip, and
was now dismounted and talking with Major O'Neill upon the absorbing
topic. These cronies saw Spaight at the turnpike, and as he showed his
ticket, he talked with the man. Of course, the news was come. The
turnpike-man knew it by this time; and off scampered Toole, and the
major followed close at his heels, at double-quick. He made a dismal
shake or two of his head, and lifted his hand as they drew near. Toole's
heart misgave him.

'Well, how is it?--what's the news?' he panted.

'A true bill,' answered Spaight, with a solemn stare; 'a true bill,
Sir.'

Toole uttered an oath of consternation, and taking the words out of
Spaight's mouth, told the news to the major.

'Do you tell me so?' exclaimed the major. 'Bedad, Sir, I'm uncommon
sorry.'

'A bad business, Sir,' observed Spaight.

'No worse,' said Toole. 'If they convict him on this, you know--in case
Sturk dies, and die he will--they'll indict and convict him on the more
serious charge,' and he winked gloomily, 'the evidence is all one.'

'That poor little Sally Nutter!' ejaculated the major. 'She's to be
pitied, the crature!'

''Tis mighty slender evidence to take a man's life on,' said Toole, with
some disgust. 'Be the law, Sir, the whole thing gives me a complete
turn. Are you to dine with Colonel Strafford to-day?'

'I am, Sir,' said the major; 'an' it goes again' the colonel's grain to
have a party at all just now, with the respect he has for the family up
there,' and he nodded his head, pensively, toward the Elms. 'But he
asked Lowe ten days ago, and Mr. Dangerfield, and two or three more; and
you know he could not put them off on that ground--there being no
relationship, you see--and, 'pon my oath, Sir, I'd rather not go myself,
just now.'

That evening, at five o'clock, Colonel Stafford's dinner party assembled
at the King's House. The colonel was a serene man, and hospitality--even
had he been in the dumps--demands her sacrifices. He, therefore, did the
honours as beseemed a genial and courteous old officer of the Royal
Irish Artillery, who, if his conversation was not very remarkable in
quality, and certainly not exorbitant in quantity, made up by listening
a great deal, and supplying no end of civility, and an affluence of very
pretty claret. Mr. Justice Lowe was there, and Mr. Dangerfield, and old
Colonel Bligh, of the Magazine, and honest Major O'Neill,
notwithstanding his low spirits. Perhaps they required keeping up; and
claret like Colonel Stafford's is consoling.

The talk turned, of course, a good deal on Charles Nutter; and Mr.
Dangerfield, who was in great force, and, indeed, in particularly
pleasant spirits, except when unfortunate Nutter was actually under
discussion--when he grew grave and properly saddened--told, in his
clear, biting way, a curious rosary of Newgate stories--of highwaymen's
disguises--of clever constables--of circumstantial evidence,
marvellously elicited, and exquisitely put together--of monsters, long
concealed, drawn from the deep by the finest tackle, into upper light,
and dropped deftly into the landing-net of Justice. These curious
anecdotes of Bow-street dexterity and Bagshot dodges--thrust and
parry--mine and counter-mine--ending, for the most part, in the triumph
of Bow-street, Justice crowned, and a Tyburn speech--tickled Lowe
mightily, who quite enjoyed himself, and laughed more than his friend
Colonel Stafford ever remembered to have heard him before, over some of
the ingenious stratagems described so neatly by Dangerfield, and the gay
irony with which he pointed his catastrophes. And Lowe actually, having
obtained Colonel Stafford's leave, proposed that gallant officer's
health in a bumper, and took occasion to mention their obligations to
him for having afforded them the opportunity of enjoying Mr.
Dangerfield's sprightly and instructive sallies; and hoped, with all his
heart, that the neighbourhood was long to enjoy the advantage and
pleasure of his residence among them. And Mr. Dangerfield replied gaily,
that all that was needed to make such sweet scenery and charming company
as the place commanded absolutely irresistible, was the sense of safety
conferred by the presence of such a magistrate as Mr. Lowe, and the
convivial inspiration of such wine as their gallant host provided; and
that, for his part, being somewhat of an old boy, and having had enough
of rambling, nothing would better please him than to spend the residue
of his days amidst the lively quietude of their virtuous and hilarious
neighbourhood; and some more to the like purpose, which pleased the good
company highly, who all agreed that the white gentleman--fluent, easy,
and pointed in his delivery--was a mighty fine speaker, indeed. Though
there was a lurking consciousness in each, which none cared to publish,
that there was, at times, an indefinable flavour of burlesque and irony
in Mr. Dangerfield's compliments, which excited momentary suspicions and
qualms, which the speaker waived off, however, easily with his jewelled
fingers, and smiled mockingly away.

Lowe was mightily taken with him. There was little warmth or veneration
in that hard justice's nature. But Mr. Dangerfield had a way with him
that few men with any sort of taste for the knowledge of evil could
resist; and the cold-eyed justice of the peace hung on his words with an
attentive rapture, and felt that he was drinking deep and pleasant
draughts from the sparkling fountains of knowledge; and was really
sorry, and shook him admiringly by the hand, when Dangerfield, who had
special business at home, rose up in his brisk way, and flashed a
farewell over the company from his spectacles.

'If Mr. Dangerfield really means to stay here, he must apply for the
commission of the peace,' said Mr. Lowe, so soon as the door shut. 'We
must put it upon him. I protest I never met a man so fitted by nature
and acquirements to make a perfectly useful magistrate. He and I, Sir,
between us, we'd give a good account of this part of the county; and
there's plenty of work, Sir, if 'twere only between this and Dublin;
and, by George, Sir, he's a wonderful diverting fellow, full of
anecdote. Wonderful place London, to be sure.'

'And a good man, too, in a quiet way,' said Colonel Strafford, who could
state a fact. ''Tisn't every rich man has the heart to part with his
money as he does; he has done many charities here, and especially he has
been most bountiful to poor Sturk's family.'

'I know that,' said Lowe.

'And he sent a fifty pound note by the major there to poor Sally Nutter
o' Monday last; he'll tell you.'

And thus it is, as the foul fiend, when he vanishes, leaves a smell of
brimstone after him, a good man leaves a fragrance; and the company in
the parlour enjoyed the aroma of Mr. Dangerfield's virtues, as he
buttoned his white surtout over his breast, and dropped his vails into
the palms of the carbuncled butler and fuddled footman in the hall.

It was a clear, frosty, starlit night. White and stern was the face
which he turned upward for a moment to the sky. He paused for a second
in the ray of candle-light that gleamed through Puddock's window-shutter,
and glanced on the pale dial of his large gold watch. It was only
half-past eight o'clock. He walked on, glancing back over his shoulder,
along the Dublin road.

'The drunken beast. My mind misgives me he'll disappoint,' muttered the
silver spectacles, gliding briskly onward.

When he reached the main street he peered curiously before him under the
village tree, in quest of carriage lights.

'A lawless brute like that may be before his time as well as after.' So
he walked briskly forward, and up Sturk's door-steps, and knocked.

'The Dublin doctor hasn't come, eh?'--he asked.

'No, Sir, he isn't come yet--'twas nine o'clock, the mistress told me.'

'Very good. Tell Mrs. Sturk, pray, that I, Mr. Dangerfield, you know,
will call, as I promised, at nine o'clock precisely.'

And he turned again and walked briskly over the bridge, and away along
the Inchicore road overhanging the river. All was silent there. Not a
step but his own was stirring, and the road in places so overhung with
old trees that it was difficult to see a yard before one.

He slackened his pace, and listened, like a man who keeps an
assignation, and listened again, and laughed under his breath; and sure
enough, before long, the clink of a footstep was heard approaching
swiftly from the Dublin direction.

Mr. Dangerfield drew aside under the deep shadow of a high hawthorn
hedge, overhung by trees; and watching intently, he saw a tall, lank
figure, with a peculiar gait and stoop of its own, glide stealthily by.
He smiled after it in the dark.

The tall figure was that of our old friend, Zekiel Irons, the clerk. A
sable form, as beseemed his ecclesiastical calling--and now a white
figure was gliding without noise swiftly after him.

Suddenly, as he reached an open part of the road, a thin hand was laid
on his shoulder, and, with a start, and a 'hollo,' he sprung round.

'Hey! why, you're as frightened as if you had seen Charles--Charles
Nutter. Hey?--don't be uneasy. I heard from the parson yesterday
morning you were to be with him to-night before nine o'clock, about that
money you left in his hands, and I've chanced to meet you; and this I
want you to understand, Charles Nutter is in gaol, and we must not let
him get out--do you see? That business settled, we're at rest. So, Mr.
Irons, you must not show the white feather. Be bold--speak out what you
know--now's the time to strike. I'll put your evidence, as you reported
it to me, into shape, and you come to me to-morrow morning at eight
o'clock; and mind you, I'll reward you this time, and better than ever
you've fared before. Go on. Or stay--I'll go before.'

And Mr. Dangerfield laughed one of his chilly laughs--and, with a nod
to Irons, repeated--'eight o'clock'--and so walked on a little bit.

The clerk had not said a word. A perspiration broke forth on his
forehead, and, wiping the drops away, he said--

'Lord have mercy upon us--Lord deliver us--Lord have mercy upon us,'
like a man dying.

Mr. Dangerfield's bold proposition seemed quite to overpower and unman
him.

The white figure turned short, facing the clerk, and said he--

'See you, Mr. Irons, I'm serious--there must be no shirking. If you
undertake, you must go through; and, hark! in your ear--you shall have
five hundred pounds. I put no constraint--say yes or no--if you don't
like you needn't. Justice, I think, will be done even without your help.
But till he's quiet--you understand--nothing sure. He has been dead
and alive again--curse him; and till he's at rest, and on the surgeon's
table--ha! ha!--we sha'n't feel quite comfortable.'

'Lord have mercy upon us!' muttered Irons, with a groan.

'Amen,' said Dangerfield, with a sneering imitation.

'There, 'tis enough--if you have nerve to speak truth and do justice,
you may have the money. We're men of business--you and I. If not, I
sha'n't trouble you any more. If you like it, come to me at eight
o'clock in the morning; if not, why, stay away, and no harm's done.'

And with these words, Mr. Dangerfield turned on his heel once more, and
started at a lively pace for Chapelizod.





 PAUL DANGERFIELD MOUNTS THE STAIRS OF THE HOUSE BY THE
CHURCH-YARD, AND MAKES SOME ARRANGEMENTS.


The white figure glided duskily over the bridge. The river rushed
beneath in Egyptian darkness. The air was still, and a thousand
celestial eyes twinkled down brightly through the clear deep sky upon
the actors in this true story. He kept the left side, so that the road
lay between him and the Phoenix door, which gaped wide with a great
hospitable grin, and crimsoned the night air with a glow of candle-light.

The white figure turned the corner, and glided onward in a straight,
swift line--straight and swift as fate--to the door of Doctor Sturk.

He knocked softly at the hall-door, and swiftly stepped in and shut it.

'How's your master?'

'Jist the same way, plaze yer honour; jist sleepin'--still
sleepin'--sleepin' always,' answered the maid.

'Has the Dublin doctor come?'

'No.'

'The mistress--where's she?'

'In the room, Sir, with the masther.'

'Present my service to her--Mr. Dangerfield's compliments, you know--and
say I await her permission to come up stairs.'

Presently the maid returned, with poor Mrs. Sturk's invitation to Mr.
Dangerfield to walk up.

Up he went, leaving his white surtout and cocked hat in the hall, and
entered the chamber where pale little Mrs. Sturk, who had been crying a
great deal, sat in a dingy old tabby saque, by the light of a solitary
mould-candle at the bed-side of the noble Barney.

The mutton-fat wanted snuffing; but its light danced and splintered
brilliantly over Mr. Dangerfield's resplendent shoe-buckles, and up and
down his cut-steel buttons, and also glimmered in a more phosphoric way
upon his silver spectacles, as he bowed at the door, arrayed in a puce
cut velvet coat, lined with pink, long embroidered satin waistcoat, fine
lace ruffles and cravat, his well-shaped leg gleaming glossily in silk,
and altogether, in his glimmering jewellery, and purple and fine linen,
resembling Dives making a complimentary visit to the garret of Lazarus.

Poor little Mrs. Sturk felt her obligations mysteriously enlarged by so
much magnificence, and wondered at the goodness of this white-headed
angel in point, diamonds, and cut velvet, who had dropped from the upper
regions upon the sad and homely floor of her Barney's sick chamber.

'Dr. Dillon not yet arrived, Madam? Well, 'tis precisely his hour; we
shall have him soon. How does the patient? Ha! just as usual. How?--why
there's a change, isn't there?'

'As how, Sir?' enquired Mrs. Sturk, with a scared look.

'Why, don't you see? But you mustn't be frightened; there's one coming
in whom I have every confidence.'

'I don't see, Sir. What is it, Mr. Dangerfield? Oh, pray, Sir?'

'Why--a--nothing very particular, only he looks more languid than when I
saw him last, and discoloured somewhat, and his face more sunk, I
think--eh?'

'Oh, no, Sir--'tis this bad light--nothing more, indeed, Sir. This
evening, I assure you, Mr. Dangerfield, at three o'clock, when the sun
was shining, we were all remarking how well he looked. I never
saw--you'd have said so--such a wonderful improvement.'

And she snuffed the candle, and held it up over Barney's grim features.

'Well, Madam, I hope we soon may find it. 'Twill be a blessed
sight--eh?--when he sits up in that bed, Madam, as I trust he may this
very night, and speak--eh?'

'Oh! my precious Barney!' and the poor little woman began to cry, and
fell into a rhapsody of hopes, thanksgiving, anecdote and prayer.

In the meanwhile Dangerfield was feeling his pulse, with his watch in
the hollow of his hand.

'And aren't they better--his pulse, Sir--they were stronger this morning
by a great deal than last night--it was just at ten o'clock--don't you
perceive, Sir?'

'H'm--well, I hope, Ma'am, we'll soon find all better. Now, have you
got all things ready--you have, of course, a sheet well aired?'

'A sheet--I did not know 'twas wanted.'

'Hey, this will never do, my dear Madam--he'll be here and nothing
ready; and you'll do well to send over to the mess-room for a lump of
ice. 'Tis five minutes past nine. If you'll see to these things, I'll
sit here, Madam, and take the best care of the patient--and, d'ye see,
Mistress Sturk, 'twill be necessary that you take care that Toole hears
nothing of Dr. Dillon's coming.'

It struck me, when originally reading the correspondence which is
digested in these pages, as hardly credible that Doctor Sturk should
have continued to live for so long a space in a state of coma. Upon this
point, therefore, I took occasion to ask the most eminent surgeon of my
acquaintance, who at once quieted my doubts by detailing a very
remarkable case cited by Sir A. Cooper in his lectures, Vol. I., p. 172.
It is that of a seaman, who was pressed on board one of his Majesty's
ships, early in the revolutionary war; and while on board this vessel,
fell from the yard-arm, and was taken up insensible, in which state he
continued living for thirteen months and some days!

So with a little more talk, Mrs. Sturk, calling one of her maids, and
leaving the little girl in charge of the nursery, ran down with
noiseless steps and care-worn face to the kitchen, and Mr. Dangerfield
was left alone in the chamber with the spell-bound sleeper on the bed.

In about ten seconds he rose sharply from his chair and listened: then
very noiselessly he stepped to the door and listened again, and gently
shut it.

Then Mr. Dangerfield moved to the window. There was a round hole in the
shutter, and through it he glanced into the street, and was satisfied.

By this time he had his white-pocket-handkerchief in his hands. He
folded it deftly across and across into a small square, and then the
spectacles flashed coldly on the image of Dr. Sturk, and then on the
door; and there was a pause.

'What's that?' he muttered sharply, and listened for a second or two.

It was only one of the children crying in the nursery. The sound
subsided.

So with another long silent step, he stood by the capriole-legged old
mahogany table, with the scallop shell containing a piece of soap and a
washball, and the basin with its jug of water standing therein. Again he
listened while you might count two, and dipped the handkerchief, so
folded, into the water, and quietly squeezed it; and stood white and
glittering by Sturk's bed-side.

People moved very noiselessly about that house, and scarcely a minute
had passed when the door opened softly, and the fair Magnolia Macnamara
popped in her glowing face and brilliant glance, and whispered.

'Are you there, Mrs. Sturk, dear?'

At the far side of the bed, Dangerfield, with his flashing spectacles
and snowy aspect, and a sort of pant, rose up straight, and looked into
her eyes, like a white bird of prey disturbed over its carrion.

She uttered a little scream--quite pale on a sudden--for she did not
recognise the sinister phantom who glimmered at her over the prostrate
Sturk.

But Dangerfield laughed his quiet hollow 'ha! ha! ha!' and said
promptly,

'A strange old nurse I make, Miss Macnamara. But what can I do? Mrs.
Sturk has left me in charge, and faith I believe our patient's looking
mighty badly.'

He had observed Miss Mag glancing from him to the dumb figure in the bed
with a puzzled kind of horror.

The fact is, Sturk's face had a leaden tint; he looked, evidently
enough, even in that dim candle-light, a great deal worse than the
curious Miss Mag was accustomed to see him.

'He's very low, to-night, and seems oppressed, and his pulse is failing;
in fact, my dear young lady, he's plainly worse to-night than I like to
tell poor Mrs. Sturk, you understand.'

'And his face looks so shiny and damp-like,' said Miss Mag, with a
horrible sort of scrutiny.

'Exactly so, Miss, 'tis weakness,' observed Dangerfield.

'And you were wiping it with your pocket-handkerchief when I looked in,'
continued Miss Mag.

'Was I--ha, ha--'tis wonderful how quick we learn a new business. I vow
I begin to think I should make a very respectable nursetender.'

'And what the dickens brings him up here?' asked Miss Mag of herself;
so soon as the first shock was over, the oddity of the situation struck
her as she looked with perplexed and unpleasant sort of enquiry at Mr.
Dangerfield.

Just then up came the meek little Mrs. Sturk, and the gentleman greeted
her with a 'Well, Madam, I have not left his bedside since you went
down; and I think he looks a little better--just a little--eh?'

'I trust and pray, Sir, that when the doctor--' began Mrs. Sturk, and
stopped short, for Mr. Dangerfield frowned quickly, and pointed towards
Miss Mag, who was now, after her wont, looking round the room for matter
of interest.

'And is Pell comin' out to-night?' asked Miss Mag quickly.

'No, truly. Madam,' answered the gentleman: 'Dr. Pell's not comin'--is
he, Mrs. Sturk?'

'Dr. Pell!--oh, la--no, Sir. No, my dear.' And, after a pause, 'Oh, ho.
I wish it was over,' she groaned, with her hand pressed to her side,
looking with a kind of agony on Sturk.

'What over?' asked Miss Mag.

Just then a double-knock came to the hall-door, and Mr. Dangerfield
signed sternly to Mrs. Sturk, who first stood up, with her eyes and
mouth wide open, and then sat down, like a woman going to faint.

But the maid came up and told Miss Mag that her mother and Lieutenant
O'Flaherty were waiting on the steps for her; and so, though loath to go
unsatisfied, away she went, with a courtesy to Mr. Dangerfield and a
kiss to Mrs. Sturk, who revived on hearing it was only her fat kindly
neighbour from over the way, instead of Black Doctor Dillon, with his
murderous case of instruments.

The gentleman in the silver spectacles accompanied her to the lobby,
and offered his hand; but she dispensed with his attendance, and jumped
down the stairs with one hand to the wall and the other on the
banisters, nearly a flight at a time; and the cackle of voices rose from
the hall door, which quickly shut, and the fair vision had vanished.

Dangerfield's silver spectacles gleamed phosphorically after her from
under his lurid forehead. It was not a pleasant look, and his mouth was
very grim. In another instant he was in the room again, and glanced at
his watch.

''Tis half-past nine,' he said, in a quiet tone, but with a gleam of
intense fury over his face, 'and that--that--doctor named nine.'

Dangerfield waited, and talked a little to Mrs. Sturk and the maid, who
were now making preparations, in short sentences, by fits and starts of
half-a-dozen words at a time. He had commenced his visit ceremoniously,
but now he grew brusque, and took the command: and his tones were prompt
and stern, and the women grew afraid of him.

Ten o'clock came. Dangerfield went down stairs, and looked from the
drawing-room windows. He waxed more and more impatient. Down he went to
the street. He did not care to walk towards the King's House, which lay
on the road to Dublin; he did not choose to meet his boon companions
again, but he stood for full ten minutes, with one of Dr. Sturk's
military cloaks about him, under the village tree, directing the
double-fire of his spectacles down the street, with an incensed
steadiness, unrewarded, unrelieved. Not a glimmer of a link; not a
distant rumble of a coach-wheel. It was a clear, frosty night, and one
might hear a long way.

If any of the honest townsfolk had accidentally lighted upon that
muffled, glaring image under the dark old elm, I think he would have
mistaken it for a ghost, or something worse. The countenance at that
moment was not prepossessing.

Mr. Dangerfield was not given to bluster, and never made a noise; but
from his hollow jaws he sighed an icy curse towards Dublin, which had a
keener edge than all the roaring blasphemies of Donnybrook together;
and, with another shadow upon his white face, he re-entered the house.

'He'll not come to-night, Ma'am,' he said with a cold abruptness.

'Oh, thank Heaven!--that is--I'm so afraid--I mean about the operation.'

Dangerfield, with his hands in his pockets, said nothing. There was a
sneer on his face, white and dark, somehow. That was all. Was he
baffled, and was Dr. Sturk, after all, never to regain his speech?

At half-past ten o'clock, Mr. Dangerfield abandoned hope. Had it been
Dr. Pell, indeed, it would have been otherwise. But Black Dillon had not
a patient; his fame was in the hospitals. There was nothing to detain
him but his vices, and five hundred pounds to draw him to Chapelizod. He
had not come. He must be either brained in a row, or drunk under a
table. So Mr. Dangerfield took leave of good Mrs. Sturk, having told her
in case the doctor should come, to make him wait for his arrival before
taking any measures, and directing that he should be sent for
immediately.

So Mr. Dangerfield got into his white surtout silently in the hall, and
shut the door quickly after him, and waited, a grim sentry, under the
tree, with his face towards Dublin. Father Time had not blunted the
white gentleman's perceptions, touched his ear with his numb fingers, or
blown the smoke of his tobacco-pipe into his eyes. He was keen of eye,
sharp of hearing; but neither sight nor sound rewarded him, and so he
turned, after a few minutes, and glided away, like a white ghost, toward
the Brass Castle.

In less than five minutes after, the thunder of a coach shook Dr.
Sturk's windows, followed by a rousing peal on the hall-door, and Dr.
Dillon, in dingy splendours, and a great draggled wig, with a
gold-headed cane in his bony hand, stepped in; and, diffusing a reek of
whiskey-punch, and with a case of instruments under his arm, pierced the
maid, who opened the door, through, with his prominent black eyes, and
frightened her with his fiery face, while he demanded to see Mrs. Sturk,
and lounged, without ceremony, into the parlour; where he threw himself
on the sofa, with one of his bony legs extended on it, and his great
ugly hand under his wig scratching his head.






 MOORE THE BARBER ARRIVES, AND THE MEDICAL GENTLEMEN LOCK
THE DOOR.


The ladies were not much the wiser, though, I confess, they were not far
removed from the door. The great men inside talked indistinctly and
technically, and once Doctor Dillon was so unfeeling as to crack a
joke--they could not distinctly hear what--and hee-haw brutally over it.
And poor little Mrs. Sturk was taken with a great palpitation, and
looked as white as a ghost, and was, indeed, so obviously at the point
of swooning that her women would have removed her to the nursery, and
placed her on the bed, but that such a procedure would have obliged them
to leave the door of their sick master's room, just then a point of too
lively interest to be deserted. So they consoled their mistress, and
supported her with such strong moral cordials as compassionate persons
in their rank and circumstances are prompt to administer.

'Oh! Ma'am, jewel, don't be takin' it to heart that way--though, dear
knows, 'tis no way surprisin' you would; for may I never sin if ever I
seen such a murtherin' steel gimblet as the red-faced docthor--I mane
the Dublin man--has out on the table beside the poor masther--'tid
frighten the hangman to look at it--an' six towels, too! Why, Ma'am
dear, if 'twas what they wor goin' to slaughter a bullock they wouldn't
ax more nor that.'

'Oh! don't. Oh! Katty, Katty--don't, oh don't'

'An' why wouldn't I, my darlin' misthress, tell you what's doin', the
way you would not be dhruv out o' your senses intirely if you had no
notion, Ma'am dear, iv what they're goin' to do to him?'

At this moment the door opened, and Doctor Dillon's carbuncled visage
and glowing eyes appeared.

'Is there a steady woman there--not a child, you know, Ma'am?
A--you'll do (to Katty). Come in here, if you please, and we'll tell
you what you're to do.'

So, being nothing loath, she made her courtesy and glided in.

'Oh! doctor,' gasped poor Mrs. Sturk, holding by the hem of his garment,
'do you think it will kill him?'

'No, Ma'am--not to-night, at any rate,' he answered, drawing back; but
still she held him.

'Oh! doctor, you think it will kill him?'

'No, Ma'am--there's always some danger.'

'Danger of what, Sir?'

'Fungus, Ma'am--if he gets over the chance of inflammation. But, on the
other hand, Ma'am, we may do him a power of good; and see, Ma'am, 'twill
be best for you to go down or into the nursery, and we'll call you,
Ma'am, if need be--that is, if he's better, Ma'am, as we hope.'

'Oh! Mr. Moore, it's you,' sobbed the poor woman, holding fast by the
sleeve of the barber, who that moment, with many reverences and 'your
servant, Ma'am,' had mounted to the lobby with the look of awestruck
curiosity, in his long, honest face, which the solemn circumstance of
his visit warranted.

'You're the man we sent for?' demanded Dillon, gruffly.

''Tis good Mr. Moore,' cried trembling little Mrs. Sturk, deprecating
and wheedling him instinctively to make him of her side, and lead him to
take part with her and resist all violence to her husband--flesh of her
flesh, and bone of her bone.

'Why don't you spake, Sor-r-r? Are you the barber we sent for or no?
What ails you, man?' demanded the savage Doctor Dillon, in a suppressed
roar.

'At your sarvice, Ma'am--Sir,' replied Moore, with submissive alacrity.

'Come in here, then. Come in, will you?' cried the doctor, hauling him
in with his great red hand.

'There now--there now--there--there,' he said gruffly, extending his
palm to keep off poor Mrs. Sturk.

So he shut the door, and poor Mrs. Sturk heard him draw the bolt, and
felt that her Barney had passed out of her hands, and that she could do
nothing for him now but clasp her hands and gasp up her prayers for his
deliverance; and so great indeed was her anguish and panic, that she had
not room for the feminine reflection how great a brute Doctor Dillon
was.

So she heard them walking this way and that, but could not distinguish
what they said, only she heard them talking; and once or twice a word
reached her, but not very intelligible, such as--

''Twas Surgeon Beauchamp's--see that'

'Mighty curious.'

Then a lot of mumbling, and

'Cruciform, of course.'

This was said by Doctor Dillon, near the door, where he had come to take
an additional candle from the table that stood there; as he receded it
lost itself in mumble again, and then she heard quite plainly--

'Keep your hand there.'

And a few seconds after,

'Hold it there and don't let it drip.'

And then a little more mumbled dialogue, and she thought she heard--

'Begin now.'

And there was a dead silence of many seconds; and Mrs. Sturk felt as if
she must scream, and her heart beat at a gallop, and her dry, white
lips silently called upon her Maker for help, and she felt quite wild,
and very faint; and heard them speak brief, and low together, and then
another long silence; and then a loud voice, in a sort of shriek, cry
out that name--holy and awful--which we do not mix in tales like this.
It was Sturk's voice; and he cried in the same horrid shriek,
'Murder--mercy--Mr. Archer!'

And poor Mrs. Sturk, with a loud hysterical cry, that quivered with her
agony, answered from without, and wildly rattled at the door-handle, and
pushed with all her feeble force to get in, in a kind of crescendo
screaming--'Oh, Barney--Barney--Barney--sweetheart--what are they
doing?'

'Oh! blessed hour!--Ma'am--'tis the master himself that is talking;' and
with a very pale face the maid, who stood in the doorway beside her,
uttered her amazed thanksgiving.

And the doctors' voices were now heard plainly enough soothing the
patient, and he seemed to have grown more collected; and she heard
him--she thought--repeat a snatch of a prayer, as a man might just
rescued from a shipwreck; and he said in a tone more natural in one so
sick and weak, 'I'm a dead man--he's done it--where is he?--he's
murdered me.'

'Who?' demanded Toole's well-known voice.

'Archer--the villain--Charles Archer.'

'Give me the cup with the claret and water, and the spoon--there it is,'
said Dillon's rough bass tones.

And she heard the maid's step crossing the floor, and then there was a
groan from Sturk.

'Here, take another spoonful, and don't mind talking for a while. It's
doing mighty well. There, don't let him slip over--that's enough.'

Just then Toole opened the door enough to put his head through, and
gently restraining poor Mrs. Sturk with his hand, he said with a
vigorous whisper--

''Twill all go well, Ma'am, we hope, if he's not agitated; you must not
go in, Ma'am, nor talk to him--by-and-by you may see him, but he must be
quiet now; his pulse is very regular at present--but you see, Ma'am, we
can't be too cautious.'

While Toole was thus discoursing her at the door, she heard Dr. Dillon
washing his hands, and Sturk's familiar voice, sounding so strange after
the long silence, say very languidly and slowly--

'Take a pen, Sir--some one--take and write--write down what I say.'

'Now, Ma'am, you see he's bent on talking,' said Toole, whose quick ear
caught the promise of a revelation. 'I must be at my post, Ma'am--the
bed post--hey! We may joke now, Ma'am, that the patient's recovered his
speech; and, you know, you mustn't come in--not till we tell you it's
safe--there now--rely on me--I give you my word of honour he's doing as
well as we could have hoped for.'

And Toole shook her trembling little hand very cordially, and there was
a very good-natured twinkle in his eye.

And Toole closed the door again, and they heard Sturk murmur something
more; and then the maid, who was within, was let out by Toole, and the
door closed and bolted again, and a sort of cooing and murmuring
recommenced.

After a while, Toole, absolutely pale, and looking very stern, opened
the door, and, said he, in a quiet way--

'Ma'am, may I send Katty down to the King's House, with a note to Mr.--a
note to the King's House, Ma'am--I thank you--and see, Katty, good girl,
ask to see the gentleman himself, and take his answer from his own
lips.'

And he tore off the back of a letter, and pencilled on it these words--

'MY DEAR SIR,--Dr. Sturk has been successfully operated upon by
me and another gentleman; and being restored to speech and recollection,
but very weak, desires earnestly to see you, and make an important
disclosure to you as a justice of the peace.
               'I am, Sir, your very obedient, humble servant,
                                                     'THOMAS TOOLE.

Upon this note he clapt a large seal with the Toole arms, and when it
was complete, placed it in the hands of Katty, who, with her riding-hood
on and her head within it teeming with all sorts of wild conjectures and
horrible images, and her whole soul in a whirl of curiosity, hurried
along the dark street, now and then glinted on by a gleam through a
shutter, or enlivened by the jingle of a harpsichord, or a snatch of
talk and laughter heard faintly through the windows, and along the
Dublin-road to the gate of the King's House. The hall-door of this
hospitable mansion stood open, and a flood of red candle-light fell upon
one side of the gray horse, saddle, and holster pipes, which waited the
descent of Mr. Lowe, who was shaking hands with the hospitable colonel
at the threshold.

Katty was just in time, and the booted gentleman, in his surtout and
cape, strode back again into the light of the hall-door, and breaking
the seal, there read, with his clear cold eye, the lines which Toole had
pencilled, and thrusting it into his coat pocket, and receiving again
the fuddled butler's benedictions--he had given him half-a-crown--he
mounted his gray steed, and at a brisk trot, followed by his servant,
was, in little more than two minutes' time, at Dr. Sturk's door.

Moore, the barber, functus officio, was now sitting in the hall, with
his razors in his pocket, expecting his fee, and smelling pleasantly of
the glass of whiskey which he had just drunk to the health and long life
of the master--God bless him--and all the family.

Doctor Toole met Mr. Lowe on the lobby; he was doing the honours of the
ghastly eclaircissement, and bowed him up to the room, with many an
intervening whisper, and a sort of apology for Dillon, whom he treated
as quite unpresentable, and resolved to keep as much as practicable in
the background.

But that gentleman, who exulted in a good stroke of surgery, and had no
sort of professional delicacy, calling his absent fathers and brethren
of the scalpel and forceps by confounded hard names when he detected a
blunder or hit a blot of theirs, met Mr. Lowe on the upper lobby.

'Your servant, Sir,' said he, rubbing his great red hands with a moist
grin; 'you see what I've done. Pell's no surgeon, no more than
that--(Toole, he was going to say, but modified the comparison in
time)--that candlestick! to think of him never looking at the occiput;
and he found lying on his back--'twas well Mr. Dangerfield pitched on
me--though I say it--why shouldn't I say it--a depression, the size of
a shilling in the back of the head--a bit of depressed bone, you see,
over the cerebellum--the trepan has relieved him.'

'And was it Mr. Dangerfield?' enquired Lowe, who was growing to admire
that prompt, cynical hero more and more every hour.

'By gannies, it just was. He promised me five hundred guineas to make
him speak. What all them solemn asses could not compass, that's sweeping
in their thousands every quarter, thanks to a discerning public. Baugh!
He had heard of a rake-helly dog, with some stuff in his brain-pan, and
he came to me--and I done it--Black Dillon done it--ha, ha! that's for
the pack of them. Baugh!'

Doctor Dillon knew that the profession slighted him; and every man's
hand against him, his was against every man.

Sturk was propped up and knew Lowe, and was, in a ghastly sort of way,
glad to see him. He looked strangely pale and haggard, and spoke
faintly.

'Take pen and ink,' said he.

There were both and paper ready.

'He would not speak till you came,' whispered Toole, who looked hotter
than usual, and felt rather small, and was glad to edge in a word.

'An' don't let him talk too long; five minutes or so, and no more,' said
Doctor Dillon; 'and give him another spoonful now--and where's Mr.
Dangerfield?'

'And do you really mean to say, Sir, he promised you a fee of
five--eh?' said Toole, who could not restrain his somewhat angry
curiosity.

'Five hundred guineas--ha, ha, ha! be gannies, Sir, there's a power of
divarsion in that.'

''Tis a munificent fee, and prompted by a fine public spirit. We are all
his debtors for it! and to you, Sir, too. He's an early man, Sir, I'm
told. You'll not see him to-night. But, whatever he has promised is
already performed; you may rely on his honour.'

'If you come out at nine in the morning, Dr. Dillon, you'll find him
over his letters and desk, in his breakfast parlour,' said Toole, who,
apprehending that this night's work might possibly prove a hit for the
disreputable and savage luminary, was treating him, though a good deal
stung and confounded by the prodigious amount of the fee, with more
ceremony than he did at first. 'Short accounts, you know,' said Dillon,
locking the lid of his case down upon his instruments. 'But maybe, as
you say, 'tis best to see him in the morning--them rich fellows is often
testy--ha! ha! An' a word with you, Dr. Toole,' and he beckoned his
brother aside to the corner near the door--and whispered something in
his ear, and laughed a little awkwardly, and Toole, very red and grave,
lent him--with many misgivings, two guineas.

'An' see--don't let them give him too much of that--the chicken broth's
too sthrong--put some wather to that, Miss, i' you plaze--and give him
no more to-night--d'ye mind--than another half a wine-glass full of
clar't unless the docthor here tells you.'

So Dr. Dillon took leave, and his fiery steeds, whirling him onward,
devoured, with their resounding hoofs, the road to Dublin, where he had
mentally devoted Toole's two guineas to the pagan divinities whose
worship was nightly celebrated at the old St. Columbkill.

'We had best have it in the shape of a deposition, Sir, at once,' said
Lowe, adjusting himself at the writing-table by the bed-side, and taking
the pen in his fingers, he looked on the stern and sunken features of
the resuscitated doctor, recalled, as it were, from 'the caverns of the
dead and the gates of darkness,' to reveal an awful secret, and point
his cold finger at the head of the undiscovered murderer.

'Tell it as shortly as you can, Sir, but without haste,' said Toole,
with his finger on his pulse. Sturk looked dismal and frightened, like a
man with the hangman at his elbow.

'It was that d--d villain--Charles Archer--write that down--'twas a foul
blow--Sir, I'm murdered--I suppose.'

And then came a pause.

'Give me a spoonful of wine--I was coming out of town at dusk--this
evening--'

'No, Sir; you're here some time, stunned and unconscious.'

'Eh! how long?'

'No matter, Sir, now. Just say the date of the night it happened.'

Sturk uttered a deep groan.

'Am I dying?' said he.

'No, Sir, please goodness--far from it,' said Toole.

'Fracture?' asked Sturk, faintly.

'Why--yes--something of the sort--indeed--altogether a fracture; but
going on mighty well, Sir.'

'Stabbed anywhere--or gunshot wound?' demanded Sturk.

'Nothing of the kind, Sir, upon my honour.'

'You think--I have a chance?' and Sturk's cadaverous face was moist with
the dews of an awful suspense.

'Chance,' said Toole, in an encouraging tone, 'well, I suppose you have,
Sir--ha, ha! But, you know, you must not tire yourself, and we hope to
have you on your legs again, Sir, in a reasonable time.'

'I'm very bad--the sight's affected,' groaned Sturk.

'See, Sir, you tire yourself to no purpose. You're in good hands,
Sir--and all will go well--as we expect--Pell has been with you twice--'

'H'm! Pell--that's good.'

'And you're going on mighty well, Sir, especially to-night.'

'Doctor, upon your honour, have I a chance?'

'You have, Sir,--certainly--yes--upon my honour.'

'Thank God!' groaned Sturk, turning up the whites of his eyes, and
lifting up two very shaky hands.

'But you must not spoil it--and fatigue will do that for you,' remarked
Toole.

'But, Sir, Sir--I beg pardon, Doctor Toole--but this case is not quite a
common one. What Doctor Sturk is about to say may acquire an additional
legal value by his understanding precisely the degree of danger in which
he lies. Now, Doctor Sturk, you must not be over much disturbed,' said
Lowe.

'No, Sir--don't fear me--I'm not much disturbed,' said Sturk.

'Well, Doctor Toole,' continued Lowe, 'we must depart a little here from
regular medical routine--tell Doctor Sturk plainly all you think.'

'Why--a'--and Doctor Toole cleared his voice, and hesitated.

'Tell him what you and Doctor Dillon think, Sir. Why, Doctor Dillon
spoke very plainly to me.'

'I don't like his pulse, Sir. I think you had better not have agitated
him,' muttered Toole with an impatient oath.

''Tis worse to keep his mind doubtful, and on the stretch,' said Lowe.
'Doctor Toole, Sir, has told you the bright side of the case. It is
necessary, making the deposition you propose, that you should know
t'other.'

'Yes, of course--quite right--go on,' said Sturk faintly.

'Why, you know,' said Toole, sniffing, and a little sulkily, 'you know,
Doctor Sturk, we, doctors, like to put the best foot foremost; but you
can't but be aware, that with the fractures--two fractures--along the
summit of the skull, and the operation by the trepan, behind your head,
just accomplished, there must be, of course, some danger.'

'I see. Sir,' said Sturk, very quietly, but looking awfully cadaverous;
'all I want to know is, how long you think I may live?'

'You may recover altogether, Sir--you may--but, of course--you
may--there's a chance; and things might not go right,' said Toole,
taking snuff.

'I see--Sir--'tis enough'--and there was a pause. 'I'd like to have the
sacrament, and pray with the clergyman a little--Lord help me!--and my
will--only a few words--I don't suppose there's much left me; but
there's a power of appointment--a reversion of Â£600, stock--I'm tired.'

'Here, take this,' said Toole, and put half-a-dozen spoonsful of claret
and water into his lips, and he seemed to revive a little. 'There's no
immediate hurry--upon my honour, Doctor Sturk, there isn't,' said Toole.
'Just rest aisy a bit; you're disturbed a good deal, Sir; your pulse
shows it; and you need not, I assure you, upon my conscience and
honour--'tis quite on the cards you may recover.'

And as he spoke, Toole was dropping something from a phial into a
wine-glass--sal volatile--ether--I can't say; but when Dr. Sturk
swallowed it there was a 'potter-carrier's' aroma about the room.

Then there was a pause for a while, and Toole kept his fingers on his
pulse; and Sturk looked, for some time, as if he were on the point of
fainting, which, in his case, might have proved very like dying.

'Have you the claret bottle in the room?' demanded Toole, a little
flurried; for Sturk's pulses were playing odd pranks, and bounding and
sinking in a dance of death.

'The what, Sir?' asked the maid.

'The wine, woman--this instant,' said the doctor, with a little stamp.

So, the moment he had the bottle, he poured out half a large glass, and
began spooning it into Sturk's white parted lips.

Lowe looked on very uneasily; for he expected, as Toole did also,
prodigious revelations; though each had a suspicion that he divined
their nature tolerably clearly.

'Give him some more,' said Toole, with his fingers on the sick man's
wrist, and watching his countenance. 'D---- it, don't be afraid--more,
some more--more!'

And so the Artillery doctor's spirit revived within him; though with
flickerings and tremblings; and he heaved some great sighs, and moved
his lips. Then he lay still for a while; and after that he spoke.

'The pen, Sir,--write,' he said. 'He met me in the Butcher's Wood; he
said he was going to sleep in town,' and Sturk groaned dismally; 'and he
began talking on business--and turned and walked a bit with me. I did
not expect to see him there--he was frank--and spoke me fair. We were
walking slowly. He looked up in the sky with his hands in his coat
pockets and was a step, or so, in advance of me; and he turned short--I
didn't know--I had no more fear than you--and struck me a blow with
something he had in his hand. He rose to the blow on his toes--'twas so
swift, I had no time--I could not see what he struck with, 'twas like a
short bit of rope.'

'Charles Archer? Do you know him, Dr. Toole?' asked Lowe. Toole shook
his head.

'Charles Archer!' he repeated, looking at Sturk; 'where does he live?'
and he winked to Toole, who was about speaking, to hold his peace.

'Here--in this town--Chapelizod, up the river, a bit, with--with
a--changed name,' answered Sturk. And at the name he mentioned, Lowe and
Toole, in silence and steadfastly, exchanged a pale, grim glance that
was awful to see.






 PAUL DANGERFIELD HAS SOMETHING ON HIS MIND, AND CAPTAIN DEVEREUX
RECEIVES A MESSAGE.


Mr. Dangerfield having parted with Irons, entered the little garden or
shrubbery, which skirted on either side the short gravel walk, which
expanded to a miniature court-yard before the door of the Brass Castle.
He flung the little iron gate to with a bitter clang; so violent that
the latch sprang from its hold, and the screaking iron swung quivering
open again behind him.

Like other men who have little religion, Mr. Paul Dangerfield had a sort
of vague superstition. He was impressible by omens, though he scorned
his own weakness, and sneered at, and quizzed it sometimes in the
monologues of his ugly solitude. The swinging open of the outer gate of
his castle sounded uncomfortably behind him, like an invitation to
shapeless danger to step in after him. The further he left it behind
him, the more in his spirit was the gaping void between his two little
piers associated with the idea of exposure, defencelessness, and
rashness. This feeling grew so strong, that he turned about before he
reached his hall-door, and, with a sensation akin to fury, retraced the
fifteen or twenty steps that intervened, and grasped the cold iron with
the fiercest tension of his sinews, as if it had resented his first
violence by a dogged defiance of his wishes, and spluttering a curse
between his teeth, he dashed it to again--and again, as once more it
sprang open from the shock.

'Who's master now?' snarled Mr. Paul Dangerfield, through his clenched
teeth, and smiting the senseless iron with a vindictive swoop of his
cane. I fancy his face at this moment had some of the peculiar lines and
corrugations which we observe in that of Retzsch's Mephistopheles, when
he gripes the arm of Faust to drag him from Margaret's cell. So he stood
behind his iron grating, glaring and grinning defiance into the
darkness, with his fingers clenched hard upon his cane.

Black Dillon's failure was a blow to the progress of his plans. It
incensed him. 'That d----d outcast! That he should presume so to treat
a man who could master him so easily at any game, and buy and sell him
body and soul, and had actually bargained to give him five hundred
guineas--the needy, swinish miscreant! and paid him earnest beside--the
stupid cheat! Drink--dice--women! Why, five hundred guineas made him
free of his filthy paradise for a twelvemonth, and the leprous oaf could
not quit his impurities for an hour, and keep the appointment that was
to have made him master of his heart's desires.'

At his hall-door he paused, listening intently, with his spectacles
glimmering toward Chapelizod, for the sound of a distant step; but there
was no messenger afoot. He heard only the chill sigh of the air through
the leafless branches.

Mr. Dangerfield had not his key with him; and he beat an unnecessarily
loud and long tattoo upon his door, and before it could possibly have
been answered, he thundered a second through the passages.

Mrs. Jukes knew the meaning of that harsh and rabid summons. 'There was
something on the master's mind.' His anxieties never depressed him as
they did other men, but strung up his energies to a point of mental
tension and exasperation which made him terrible to his domestics. It
was not his acts--his conduct was always under control, but chiefly his
looks, and accents, and an influence that seemed to take possession of
him at such times that rendered him undefinably formidable to his
servants.

'Ha!--mighty obleeging (he so pronounced the word)--let in at last--cold
outside, Ma'am. You've let out the fire I suppose?'

His tones were like the bark of a wolf, and there was a devilish smirk
in his white face, as he made her a mock salutation, and glided into his
parlour. The fire was bright enough, however, as Mrs. Jukes was much
relieved to see; and dropping a courtesy she enquired whether he would
like a dish of tea, or anything?

'No, Ma'am!' he snarled.

'Would he like his dressing-gown and slippers?'

'No, Ma'am,' again. So she dropped another courtesy, and sneaked away to
the kitchen, with short, noiseless steps, and heard Mr. Dangerfield shut
the door sharply.

His servants were afraid of him. They could not quite comprehend him.
They knew it was vain trying to deceive him, and had quite given up
lying and prevaricating. Neither would he stand much talking. When they
prattled he brought them to the point sternly; and whenever a real
anxiety rested on his mind he became pretty nearly diabolical. On the
whole, however, they had a strange sort of liking for him. They were
proud of his wealth, and of his influence with great people. And though
he would not allow them to rob, disobey, or deceive him, yet he used
them handsomely, paid like a prince, was a considerate master, and made
them comfortable.

Now Mr. Dangerfield poked up his fire and lighted his candles. Somehow,
the room looked smaller he thought than it had ever seemed before. He
was not nervous--nothing could bring him to that; but his little
altercation with the iron gate, and some uncomfortable thoughts had
excited him. It was an illusion merely--but the walls seemed to have
closed in a foot or two, and the ceiling to have dropped down
proportionably, and he felt himself confined and oppressed.

'My head's a little bit heated--ira furo brevis,' and he sneered a
solitary laugh, more like himself, and went out into his tiny hall, and
opened the door, and stood on the step for air, enjoying the cold wind
that played about his temples. Presently he heard the hollow clink of
two pair of feet walking toward the village. The pedestrians were
talking eagerly; and he thought, as they passed the little iron gate of
his domain, he heard his own name mentioned, and then that of Mervyn. I
dare say it was mere fancy; but, somehow, he did not like it, and he
walked swiftly down to the little gate by the road side--it was only
some twenty yards--keeping upon the grass that bounded it, to muffle the
sound of his steps. This white phantom noiselessly stood in the shadow
of the road side. The interlocutors had got a good way on, and were
talking loud and volubly. But he heard nothing that concerned him from
either again, though he waited until their steps and voices were lost in
the distance.

The cool air was pleasant about his bare temples, and Mr. Paul
Dangerfield waited a while longer, and listened, for any sound of
footsteps approaching from the village, but none such was audible; and
beginning to feel a little chilly, he entered his domicile again, shut
the hall-door, and once more found himself in the little parlour of the
Brass Castle.

His housekeeper heard his harsh voice barking down the passage at her,
and rising with a start from her seat, cried,

'At your service, Sir.'

'At a quarter to twelve o'clock fetch me a sandwich, and a glass of
absynthe, and meanwhile, don't disturb me.'

And she heard him enter his little parlour, and shut the door.

'There's something to vex, but nothing to threaten--nothing. It's all
that comical dream--curse it! What tricks the brain plays us! 'Tis fair
it should though. We work it while we please, and it plays when it may.
The slave has his saturnalia, and flouts his tyrant. Ha, ha! 'tis time
these follies were ended. I've something to do to-night.'

So Mr. Dangerfield became himself again, and applied himself keenly to
his business.

When I first thought of framing the materials which had accumulated in
my hands into a narrative, dear little Lily Walsingham's death was a
sore trouble to me. 'Little' Lily I call her, but though slight, she was
not little--rather tall, indeed.

It was, however, the term I always heard connected with her pretty name
in my boyhood, when the old people, who had remembered her very long
ago, mentioned her, as they used, very kindly, a term of endearment that
had belonged to her, and in virtue of the childlike charm that was about
her, had grown up with her from childhood. I had plans for mending this
part of the record, and marrying her to handsome Captain Devereux, and
making him worthy of her; but somehow I could not. From very early times
I had known the sad story. I had heard her beauty talked about in my
childhood; the rich, clear tints, the delicate outlines, those tender
and pleasant dimples, like the wimpling of a well; an image so pure, and
merry, and melancholy withal, had grown before me, and in twilight
shadows visited the now lonely haunts of her brief hours; even the old
church, in my evening rambles along the uplands of the park, had in my
eyes so saddened a grace in the knowledge that those slender bones lay
beneath its shadows, and all about her was so linked in my mind with
truth, and melancholy, and altogether so sacred, that I could not trifle
with the story, and felt, even when I imagined it, a pang, and a
reproach, as if I had mocked the sadness of little Lily's fate; so,
after some ponderings and trouble of mind I gave it up, and quite
renounced the thought.

And, after all, what difference should it make? Is not the generation
among whom her girlish lot was cast long passed away? A few years more
or less of life. What of them now? When honest Dan Loftus cited those
lines from the 'Song of Songs,' did he not make her sweet epitaph? Had
she married Captain Devereux, what would her lot have been? She was not
one of those potent and stoical spirits, who can survive the wreck of
their best affections, and retort injury with scorn. In forming that
simple spirit, Nature had forgotten arrogance and wrath. She would never
have fought against the cruelty of changed affections if that or the
treasons of an unprincipled husband had come. His love would have been
her light and life, and when that was turned away, like a northern
flower that has lost its sun, she would have only hung her pretty head,
and died, in her long winter. So viewing now the ways of wisdom from a
distance, I think I can see they were the best, and how that fair, young
mortal, who seemed a sacrifice, was really a conqueror.

Puddock and Devereux on this eventful night, as we remember, having
shaken hands at the door-steps, turned and went up stairs together, very
amicably again, to the captain's drawing-room.

So Devereux, when they returned to his lodgings, had lost much of his
reserve, and once on the theme of his grief, stormed on in gusts, and
lulls, and thunder, and wild upbraidings, and sudden calms; and the
good-natured soul of little Puddock was touched, and though he did not
speak, he often dried his eyes quietly, for grief is conversant not with
self, but with the dead, and whatever is generous moves us.

'There's no one stirring now, Puddock--I'll put my cloak about me and
walk over to the Elms, to ask how the rector is to-night,' said
Devereux, muffling himself in his military mantle.

It was only the restlessness of grief. Like all other pain, grief is
haunted with the illusion that change means relief; motion is the
instinct of escape. Puddock walked beside him, and they went swiftly and
silently together.

When they reached the other side of the bridge, and stood under the
thorn-hedge fronting the leafless elms, Devereux was irresolute.

'Would you wish me to enquire?' asked Puddock. Devereux held him
doubtfully by the arm for a moment or two, and then said gently--

'No, I thank you, Puddock--I'll go--yes--I'll go myself;' and so Captain
Devereux went up to the door.

John Tracy, at the steps, told him that he thought his master wished to
speak with him; but he was not quite sure. The tall muffled figure
therefore waited at the door while John went in to tell his master, and
soon returned to say that Doctor Walsingham would be much obliged to him
to step into the study.

When the doctor saw Devereux, he stood up to meet him.

'I hope, Sir,' said Devereux, very humbly, 'you have forgiven me.'

The doctor took his hand and shook it very hard, and said, 'There's
nothing--we're both in sorrow. Everyone--everyone is sorry, Sir, but you
more.'

Devereux did not say anything, being moved, as I suppose. But he had
drawn his cloak about his face, and was looking down.

'There was a little message--only a word or two,' said the doctor; 'but
everything of hers is sacred.'

He turned over some papers in his desk, and chose one. It was in Lily's
pretty handwriting.

'I am charged with this little message. Oh, my darling!' and the old man
cried bitterly.

'Pray, read it--you will understand it--'tis easily read. What a pretty
hand it was!'

So Devereux took the little paper, and read just the words which
follow:--

    'My beloved father will, I hope, if he thinks it right, tell Captain
    Richard Devereux that I was not so unkind and thankless as I may
    have seemed, but very grateful for his preference, of which I know,
    in many ways, how unworthy I was. But I do not think we could have
    been happy; and being all over, it is a great comfort to friends who
    are separated here, that there is a place where all may meet again,
    if God will; and as I did not see or speak with him since my dear
    father brought his message, I wished that so much should be said,
    and also to say a kind good-bye, and give him all good wishes.

                                                            'LILIAS.'
    'Friday evening.'


Captain Richard Devereux read this simple little record through, and
then he said:--

'Oh, Sir, may I have it--isn't it mine?'

We who have heard those wondrous aÃ«rial echoes of Killarney, when the
breath has left the bugle and its cadences are silent, take up the
broken links of the lost melody with an answer far away, sad and
celestial, real, yet unreal, the fleeting yet lingering spirit of music,
that is past and over, have something in memory by which we can
illustrate the effect of these true voices of the thoughts and
affections that have perished, returning for a few charmed moments
regretfully and sweetly from the sea of eternal silence.

And so that sad and clear farewell, never repeated, was long after, in
many a lonely night, answered by the voice of Devereux.

'Did she--did she know how I loved her? Oh, never, never! I'll never
love any but you. Darling, darling--you can't die. Oh, no, no, no! Your
place knows you still; your place is here--here--here.'

And he smote his breast over that heart which, such as it was, cherished
a pure affection for her.





 MERVYN, AND THE WITCHES'
REVELS AT THE MILLS.


I would be ashamed to say how, soon after Dangerfield had spoken to Mr.
Mervyn in the church-yard on the Sunday afternoon, when he surprised him
among the tombstones, the large-eyed young gentleman, with the long
black hair, was at his desk, and acting upon his suggestion. But the
Hillsborough was to sail next day; and Mr. Mervyn's letter, containing
certain queries, and an order for twenty guineas on a London house,
glided in that packet with a favouring breeze from the Bay of Dublin, on
its way to the London firm of Elrington Brothers.

On the morning of the day whose events I have been describing in the
last half-dozen chapters, Mr. Mervyn received his answer, which was to
the following effect:--

     'SIR,--Having made search for the Paper which you enquire
     after, we have Found one answering your description in a General
     way; and pursuant to your request and Direction, beg leave to
     forward you a Copy thereof, together with a copy of a letter
     concerning it, received by the same post from Sir Philip Drayton,
     of Drayton Hall, Sometime our Client, and designed in Part to
     explain his share in the matter. Your order for twenty guineas, on
     Messrs. Trett and Penrose, hath come to hand, and been duly
     honoured, and we thankfully Accept the same, in payment for all
     trouble had in this matter.
                                                 '&c, &c, &c.'

The formal document which it enclosed said:--

     'This is to certify that Charles Archer, Esq., aged, as shortly
     before his death he reported himself, thirty-five years, formerly
     of London, departed this life, on the 4th August, 1748, in his
     lodgings, in the city of Florence, next door to the "Red Lion," and
     over against the great entrance of the Church of the Holy Cross, in
     the which, having conformed to the holy Roman faith, he is
     buried.--Signed this 12th day of August, 1748.

                                      'PHILIP DRAYTON, Baronet.
                                      'GAETANO MELONI, M.D.
                                      'ROBERT SMITH, Musician.

     'We three having seen the said Charles Archer during his sickness,
     and after his decease.'

Then followed the copy of the baronet's letter to his attorneys, which
was neither very long nor very business-like.

     'Why the plague don't you make the scoundrel, Jekyl, pay? His
     mother's dead only t'other day, and he must be full of money. I've
     scarce a marvedy in hand, now; so let him have a writ in his, drat
     him. About that certificate, I'm almost sorry I signed it. I've bin
     thinking 'tis like enough I may be troubled about it. So you may
     tell 'em I know no more only what is there avouched. No more I do.
     He played at a faro-table here, and made a very pretty figure. But
     I hear now from Lord Orland that there are many bad reports of him.
     He was the chief witness against that rogue, Lord Dunoran, who
     swallowed poison in Newgate, and, they say, leaned hard against
     him, although he won much money of him, and swore with a
     blood-thirsty intention. But that is neither here nor there; I mean
     ill reports of his rogueries at play, and other doings, which, had
     I sooner known, my name had not bin to the paper. So do not make a
     noise about it, and maybe none will ask for't. As for Jack Jekyl,
     why not take the shortest way with him. You're very pitiful
     fellows; but I wish o' my conscience you'd take some pity o' me,
     and not suffer me to be bubbled,' &c., &c.

There was only a sentence or two more, referring in the same strain to
other matters of business, of which, in the way of litigation, he seemed
to have no lack, and the letter ended.

'I'll go direct to London and see these people, and thence to Florence.
Gaetano Meloni--he may be living--who knows? He will remember the priest
who confessed him. A present to a religious house may procure--in a
matter of justice, and where none can be prejudiced, for the case is
very special--a dispensation, if he be the very Charles Archer--and he
may--why not?--have disclosed all on his death-bed. First, I shall see
Mr. Dangerfield--then those attorneys; and next make search in Florence;
and, with the aid of whatever I can glean there, and from Irons,
commence in England the intensest scrutiny to which a case was ever yet
subjected.'

Had it not been so late when he found this letter on his return, he
would have gone direct with it to the Brass Castle; but that being quite
out of the question, he read it again and again. It is wonderful how
often a man will spell over and over the same commonplace syllables, if
they happen to touch a subject vitally concerning himself, and what
theories and speculations he will build upon the accidental turn of a
phrase, or the careless dash of a pen.

As we see those wild animals walk their cages in a menagerie, with the
fierce instincts of suppressed action rolling in the vexed eye and
vibrating in every sinew, even so we behold this hero of the flashing
glance and sable locks treading, in high excitement, the floor of the
cedar parlour. Every five minutes a new hope--a new conjecture, and
another scrutiny of the baronet's letter, or of the certificate of
Archer's death, and hour after hour speeding by in the wild chase of
successive chimeras.

While Mr. Justice Lowe's servant was spurring into town at a pace which
made the hollow road resound, and struck red flashes from the stones, up
the river, at the Mills, Mistress Mary Matchwell was celebrating a sort
of orgie. Dirty Davy and she were good friends again. Such friendships
are subject to violent vicissitudes, and theirs had been interrupted by
a difference of opinion, of which the lady had made a note with a brass
candlestick over his eye. Dirty Davy's expressive feature still showed
the green and yellow tints of convalescence. But there are few
philosophers who forgive so frankly as a thorough scoundrel, when it is
his interest to kiss and be friends. The candlestick was not more
innocent of all unpleasant feeling upon the subject than at that moment
was Dirty Davy.

Dirty Davy had brought with him his chief clerk, who was a facetious
personage, and boozy, and on the confidential footing of a common
rascality with his master, who, after the fashion of Harry V. in his
nonage, condescended in his frolics and his cups to men of low estate;
and Mary Matchwell, though fierce and deep enough, was not averse on
occasion, to partake of a bowl of punch in sardonic riot, with such
agreeable company.

Charles Nutter's unexpected coming to life no more affected Mary
Matchwell's claim than his supposed death did her spirits. Widow or
wife, she was resolved to make good her position, and the only thing she
seriously dreaded was that an intelligent jury, an eminent judge, and an
adroit hangman, might remove him prematurely from the sphere of his
conjugal duties, and forfeit his worldly goods to the crown.

Next morning, however, a writ or a process of some sort, from which
great things were expected, was to issue from the court in which her
rights were being vindicated. Upon the granting of this, Mistress
Matchwell and Dirty Davy--estranged for some time, as we have
said,--embraced. She forgot the attorney's disrespectful language, and
he the lady's brass candlestick, and, over the punch-bowl of oblivion
and vain glory, they celebrated their common victory.

Under advice, M. M. had acquiesced, pending her vigorous legal
proceedings, in poor little Sally Nutter's occupying her bed-room in the
house for a little while longer. The beleagured lady was comforted in
her strait by the worthy priest, by honest Dr. Toole, and not least, by
that handsome and stalworth nymph, the daring Magnolia. That blooming
Amazon was twice on the point of provoking the dismal sorceress, who
kept her court in the parlour of the Mills, to single combat. But
fortune willed it otherwise, and each time the duel had been interrupted
in its formal inception, and had gone no further than that spirited
prologue in which the female sex so faithfully preserve the tradition of
those thundering dialogues which invariably precede the manual business
of the Homeric fray.

This was the eve of a great triumph and a memorable gala. Next morning,
Sally Nutter was to be scalped, roasted, and eaten up, and the night was
spent in savage whoopings, songs and dances. They had got a reprobate
blind fiddler into the parlour, where their punch-bowl steamed--a most
agreeable and roistering sinner, who sang indescribable songs to the
quaver of his violin, and entertained the company with Saturnalian
vivacity, jokes, gibes, and wicked stories. Larry Cleary, thou man of
sin and music! methinks I see thee now. Thy ugly, cunning, pitted face,
twitching and grinning; thy small, sightless orbs rolling in thy devil's
merriment, and thy shining forehead red with punch.

In the kitchen things were not more orderly; M. M.'s lean maid was making
merry with the bailiff, and a fat and dreadful trollop with one
eye--tipsy, noisy, and pugnacious.

Poor little Sally Nutter and her maids kept dismal vigil in her
bed-room. But that her neighbours and her lawyer would in no sort permit
it, the truth is, the frightened little soul would long ago have made
herself wings, and flown anywhere for peace and safety.

It is remarkable how long one good topic, though all that may be said
upon it has been said many scores of times, will serve the colloquial
purposes of the good folk of the kitchen or the nursery. There was
scarcely half-an-hour in the day during which the honest maids and their
worthy little mistress did not discuss the dreadful Mary Matchwell. They
were one and all, though in different degrees, indescribably afraid of
her. Her necromantic pretensions gave an indistinctness and poignancy to
their horror. She seemed to know, by a diabolical intuition, what
everybody was about--she was so noiseless and stealthy, and always at
your elbow when you least expected. Those large dismal eyes of hers,
they said, glared green in the dark like a cat's; her voice was
sometimes so coarse and deep, and her strength so unnatural, that they
were often on the point of believing her to be a man in disguise. She
was such a blasphemer, too; and could drink what would lay a trooper
under the table, and yet show it in nothing but the superintensity of
her Satanic propensities. She was so malignant, and seemed to bear to
all God's creatures so general a malevolence, that her consistent and
superlative wickedness cowed and paralysed them. The enigma grew more
horrible every day and night, and they felt, or fancied, a sort of
influence stealing over them which benumbed their faculty of resistance,
and altogether unstrung their nerves.

The grand compotation going on in the parlour waxed louder and wilder as
the night wore on. There were unseen guests there, elate and inspiring,
who sat with the revellers--phantoms who attend such wassail, and keep
the ladle of the punch-bowl clinking, the tongue of the songster glib
and tuneful, and the general mirth alive and furious. A few honest folk,
with the gift of a second sight in such matters, discover their uncanny
presence--leprous impurity, insane blasphemy, and the stony grin of
unearthly malice--and keep aloof.

To heighten their fun, this jovial company bellowed their abominable
ballads in the hall, one of them about 'Sally M'Keogh,' whose sweetheart
was hanged, and who cut her throat with his silver-mounted razor, and
they hooted their gibes up the stairs. And at last Mary Matchwell,
provoked by the passive quietude of her victim, summoned the three
revellers from the kitchen, and invaded the upper regions at their
head--to the unspeakable terror of poor Sally Nutter--and set her demon
fiddler a scraping, and made them and Dirty Davy's clerk dance a frantic
reel on the lobby outside her bed-room door, locked and bolted inside,
you may be sure.

In the midst of this monstrous festivity and uproar, there came, all on
a sudden, a reverberating double-knock at the hall-door, so loud and
long that every hollow, nook, and passage of the old house rang again.
Loud and untimely as was the summons, it had a character, not of riot,
but of alarm and authority. The uproar was swallowed instantly in
silence. For a second only the light of the solitary candle shone upon
the pale, scowling features of Mary Matchwell, and she quenched its wick
against the wall. So the Walpurgis ended in darkness, and the company
instinctively held their breaths.

There was a subdued hum of voices outside, and a tramping on the crisp
gravel, and the champing and snorting of horses, too, were audible.

'Does none o' yez see who's in it?' said the blind fiddler.

'Hold your tongue,' hissed Mary Matchwell with a curse, and visiting the
cunning pate of the musician with a smart knock of the candlestick.

'I wisht I had your thumb undher my grinder,' said the fiddler, through
his teeth, 'whoever you are.'

But the rest was lost in another and a louder summons at the hall-door,
and a voice of authority cried sternly,

'Why don't you open the door?--hollo! there--I can't stay here all
night.'

'Open to him, Madam, I recommend you,' said Dirty Davy, in a hard
whisper; 'will I go?'

'Not a step; not a word;' and Mary Matchwell griped his wrist.

But a window in Mrs. Nutter's room was opened, and Moggy's voice cried
out--

'Don't go, Sir; for the love o' goodness, don't go. Is it Father Roach
that's in it?'

''Tis I, woman--Mr. Lowe--open the door, I've a word or two to say.'








About a quarter of an hour before this, Mr. Paul Dangerfield was packing
two trunks in his little parlour, and burning letters industriously in
the fire, when his keen ear caught a sound at which a prophetic instinct
within him vibrated alarm. A minute or two before he had heard a
stealthy footstep outside. Then he heard the cook walk along the
passage, muttering to herself, to the hall-door, where there arose a
whispering. He glanced round his shoulder at the window. It was barred.
Then lifting the table and its load lightly from before him, he stood
erect, fronting the door, and listening intently. Two steps on tip-toe
brought him to it, and he placed his fingers on the key. But he
recollected a better way. There was one of those bolts that rise and
fall perpendicularly in a series of rings, and bar or open the door by a
touch to a rope connected with it by a wire and a crank or two.

He let the bolt softly drop into its place; the rope was within easy
reach, and with his spectacles gleaming white on the door, he kept
humming a desultory tune, like a man over some listless occupation.

Mr. Paul Dangerfield was listening intently, and stepped as softly as a
cat. Then, with a motion almost elegant, he dropt his right hand lightly
into his coat-pocket, where it lay still in ambuscade.

There came a puffing night air along the passage, and rattled the door;
then a quiet shutting of the hall-door, and a shuffling and breathing
near the parlour.

Dangerfield, humming his idle tune with a white and sharpening face, and
a gaze that never swerved, extended his delicately-shaped fingers to the
rope, and held it in his left hand. At this moment the door-handle was
suddenly turned outside, and the door sustained a violent jerk.

'Who's there?' demanded the harsh, prompt accents of Dangerfield,
suspending his minstrelsy. 'I'm busy.'

'Open the door--we've a piece of intelligence to gi'e ye.'

'Certainly--but don't be tedious.' (He drew the string, and the bolt
shot up). 'Come in, Sir.'

The door flew open; several strange faces presented themselves on the
threshold, and at the same instant, a stern voice exclaimed--

'Charles Archer, I arrest you in the king's name.'

The last word was lost in the stunning report of a pistol, and the
foremost man fell with a groan. A second pistol already gleamed in
Dangerfield's hand, and missed. With a spring like a tiger he struck the
hesitating constable in the throat, laying his scalp open against the
door-frame, and stamping on his face as he fell; and clutching the third
by the cravat, he struck at his breast with a knife, already in his
hand. But a pistol-shot from Lowe struck his right arm, scorching the
cloth; the dagger and the limb dropped, and he staggered back, but
recovered his equilibrium, and confronted them with a white skull-like
grin, and a low 'ha, ha, ha!'

It was all over, and the silver spectacles lay shattered on the floor,
like a broken talisman, and a pair of gray, strangely-set, wild eyes
glared upon them.

The suddenness of his assault, his disproportioned physical strength and
terrific pluck, for a second or two, confounded his adversaries; but he
was giddy--his right arm dead by his side. He sat down in a chair
confronting them, his empty right hand depending near to the floor, and
a thin stream of blood already trickling down his knuckles, his face
smiling, and shining whitely with the damp of anguish, and the cold low
'ha, ha, ha!' mocking the reality of the scene.

'Heinous old villain!' said Lowe, advancing on him.

'Well, gentlemen, I've shown fight, eh?--and now I suppose you want my
watch, and money, and keys--eh?'

'Read the warrant, Sir,' said Lowe, sternly.

'Warrant! hey--warrant?--why, this is something new--will you be so good
as to give me a glass of water--thank you--hold the paper a moment
longer--I can't get this arm up.' With his left hand he set down the
tumbler-glass, and then held up the warrant.

'Thank ye. Well, this warrant's for Charles Archer.'

'Alias Paul Dangerfield--if you read, Sir.'

'Thank you--yes--I see--that's news to me. Oh! Mr. Lowe--I did not see
you--I haven't hurt you, I hope? Why the plague do you come at these
robbing hours? We'd have all fared better had you come by daylight.'

Lowe did not take the trouble to answer him.

'I believe you've killed that constable in the exercise of his duty,
Sir; the man's dead,' said Lowe, sternly.

'Another gloss on my text; why invade me like housebreakers?' said
Dangerfield with a grim scoff.

'No violence, Sirrah, on your peril--the prisoner's wounded,' said Lowe,
catching the other fellow by the collar and thrusting him back: he had
gathered himself up giddily, and swore he'd have the scoundrel's life.

'Well, gentlemen, you have made a false arrest, and shot me while
defending my person--you--four to one!--and caused the death of your
accomplice; what more do you want?'

'You must accompany us to the county gaol, Sir; where I'll hand in your
committal.'

'Dr. Toole, I presume, may dress my arm?'

'Certainly, Sir.'

'Good! what more?'

'There's a coach at the door, you'll please to step in, Sir.'

'Good, Sir, again; and now permit me to make a remark. I submit, Sir, to
all this violence, and will go with you, under protest, and with a
distinct warning to you, Mr. Lowe, and to your respectable body-guard of
prize-fighters and ruffians--how many?--two, four, five, six, upon my
honour, counting the gentleman upon the floor, and yourself, Sir--seven,
pitted against one old fellow, ha, ha, ha!--a distinct warning, Sir,
that I hold you accountable for this outrage, and all its consequences.'

'See to that man; I'm afraid he has killed him,', said Lowe.

He was not dead, however, but, as it seemed, suffering intense pain, and
unable to speak except in a whisper. They got him up with his back to
the wall.

'You issue a warrant against another man whom I believe to be dead, and
execute it upon me--rather an Irish proceeding, Sir; but, perhaps, if
not considered impertinent, you will permit me to enquire what is the
particular offence which that other person has committed, and for which
you have been pleased to shoot me?'

'You may read it on the warrant, Sir; 'tis for a murderous assault on
Doctor Sturk.'

'Hey? better and better! why, I'm ready to pay five hundred guineas to
make him speak; and you'll soon find how expensive a blunder you've
committed, Sir,' observed Dangerfield, with a glare of menace through
his hollow smile.

'I'll stand that hazard, Sir,' rejoined Lowe, with a confident sneer.

The dreadful sounds of the brief scuffle had called up the scared and
curious servants. The smell of the pistol-smoke, the sight of blood, the
pale faces of the angry and agitated men, and the spectacle of their
master, mangled, ghastly, and smiling, affrighted Mrs. Jukes; and the
shock and horror expressed themselves in tears and distracted
lamentations.

'I must have your keys, Sir, if you please,' said Mr. Lowe.

'A word first--here, Jukes,' he addressed his housekeeper; 'stop that,
you fool!' (she was blubbering loudly) ''tis a mistake, I tell you; I
shall be back in an hour. Meanwhile, here are my keys; let Mr. Lowe,
there, have them whenever he likes--all my papers, Sir (turning to
Lowe). I've nothing, thank Heaven! to conceal. Pour some port wine into
that large glass.'

And he drank it off, and looked better; he appeared before on the point
of fainting.

'I beg pardon, gentlemen--will you drink some wine?'

'I thank you, no, Sir. You'll be good enough to give me those keys' (to
the housekeeper).

'Give them--certainly,' said Dangerfield.

'Which of them opens the chest of drawers in your master's bed-chamber
facing the window?' He glanced at Dangerfield, and thought that he was
smiling wider, and his jaws looked hollower, as he repeated--

'If she does not know it, I'll be happy to show it you.'

With a surly nod, Mr. Lowe requited the prisoner's urbanity, and
followed Mrs. Jukes into her master's bed-chamber; there was an
old-fashioned oak chest of drawers facing the window.

'Where's Captain Cluffe?' enquired Lowe.

'He stopped at his lodgings, on the way,' answered the man; 'and said
he'd be after us in five minutes.'

'Well, be good enough, Madam, to show me the key of these drawers.'

So he opened the drawers in succession, beginning at the top, and
searching each carefully, running his fingers along the inner edges, and
holding the candle very close, and grunting his disappointment as he
closed and locked each in its order.

In the mean time, Doctor Toole was ushered into the little parlour,
where sat the disabled master of the Brass Castle. The fussy little
mediciner showed in his pale, stern countenance, a sense of the shocking
reverse and transformation which the great man of the village had
sustained.

'A rather odd situation you find me in, Doctor Toole,' said white Mr.
Dangerfield, in his usual harsh tones, but with a cold moisture shining
on his face; 'under duresse, Sir, in my own parlour, charged with
murdering a gentleman whom I have spent five hundred guineas to bring to
speech and life, and myself half murdered by a justice of the peace and
his discriminating followers, ha, ha, ha! I'm suffering a little pain,
Sir; will you be so good as to lend me your assistance?'

Toole proceeded to his task much more silently than was his wont, and
stealing, from time to time, a glance at his noticeable patient with the
wild gray eyes, as people peep curiously at what is terrible and
repulsive.

''Tis broken, of course,' said Dangerfield.

'Why, yes, Sir,' answered Toole; 'the upper arm--a bullet, Sir. H'm,
ha--yes; it lies only under the skin, Sir.'

And with a touch of the sharp steel it dropped into the doctor's
fingers, and lay on a bloody bit of lint on the table by the
wine-glasses. Toole applied his sticking-plaster, and extemporised a set
of splints, and had the terrified cook at his elbow tearing up one of
her master's shirts into strips for bandages; and so went on neatly and
rapidly with his shifty task.

In the mean time, Cluffe had arrived. He was a little bit huffed and
grand at being nailed as an evidence, upon a few words carelessly, or,
if you will, confidentially dropped at his own mess-table, where Lowe
chanced to be a guest; and certainly with no suspicion that his little
story could in any way be made to elucidate the mystery of Sturk's
murder. He would not have minded, perhaps, so much, had it not been that
it brought to light and memory again the confounded ducking sustained by
him and Puddock, and which, as an officer and a very fine fellow, he
could not but be conscious was altogether an undignified reminiscence.

'Yes, the drawers were there, he supposed; those were the very ones; he
stooped but little; it must have been the top one, or the next to it.
The thing was about as long as a drumstick, like a piece of whip handle,
with a spring in it; it bent this way and that, as he dried it in the
towel, and at the butt it was ribbed round and round with metal
rings--devilish heavy.'

So they examined the drawers again, took everything out of them, and
Captain Cluffe, not thinking it a soldier-like occupation, tacitly
declined being present at it, and, turning on his heel, stalked out of
the room.

'What's become of it, Ma'am?' said Lowe, suddenly and sternly, turning
upon Mrs. Jukes, and fixing his eyes on hers. There was no guilty
knowledge there.

'He never had any such thing that I know of,' she answered stoutly; 'and
nothing could be hid from me in these drawers, Sir; for I had the key,
except when it lay in the lock, and it must ha' been his horsewhip; it
has some rings like of leather round it, and he used to lay it on these
drawers.'

Cluffe was, perhaps, a little bit stupid, and Lowe knew it; but it was
the weakness of that good magistrate to discover in a witness for the
crown many mental and moral attributes which he would have failed to
recognise in him had he appeared for the prisoner.

'And where's that whip, now?' demanded Lowe.

'By the hall-door, with his riding-coat, Sir,' answered the bewildered
housekeeper.

'Go on, if you please, Ma'am, and let me see it.'

So to the hall they went, and there, lying across the pegs from which
Mr. Dangerfield's surtout and riding-coat depended, there certainly was
a whip with the butt fashioned very much in the shape described by
Captain Cluffe; but alas, no weapon--a mere toy--leather and cat-gut.

Lowe took it in his hand, and weighing it with a look of disgust and
disappointment, asked rather impatiently--

'Where's Captain Cluffe?'

The captain had gone away.

'Very well, I see,' said Lowe, replacing the whip; 'that will do. The
hound!'

Mr. Lowe now re-entered the little parlour, where the incongruous crowd,
lighted up with Mr. Dangerfield's wax lights, and several kitchen
candles flaring in greasy brass sticks, were assisting at the treatment
of the master of the castle and the wounded constables.

'Well, Sir,' said Mr. Dangerfield, standing erect, with his coat sleeve
slit, and his arm braced up in splints, stiff and helpless in a sling,
and a blot of blood in his shirt sleeve, contrasting with the white
intense smirk of menace upon his face; 'if you have quite done with my
linen and my housekeeper, Sir, I'm ready to accompany you under protest,
as I've already said, wherever you design to convey my mangled person. I
charge you, Sir, with the safety of my papers and my other property
which you constrain me to abandon in this house; and I think you'll rue
this night's work to the latest hour of your existence.'

'I've done, and will do my duty, Sir,' replied Lowe, with dry decision.

'You've committed a d----d outrage; duty? ha, ha, ha!'

'The coach is at the door, hey?' asked Lowe

'I say, Sir,' continued Dangerfield, with a wolfish glare, and speaking
in something like a suppressed shriek, 'you shall hear my warning and
my protest, although it should occupy the unreasonable period of two
whole minutes of your precious time. You half murder, and then arrest me
for the offence of another man, and under the name of a man who has been
dead and buried full twenty years. I can prove it; the eminent London
house of Elrington Brothers can prove it; the handwriting of the late
Sir Philip Drayton, Baronet, of Drayton Hall, and of two other
respectable witnesses to a formal document, can prove it; dead and
rotten--dust, Sir. And in your stupid arrogance, you blundering
Irishman, you dare to libel me--your superior in everything--with his
villainous name, and the imputation of his crimes--to violate my house
at the dead of night--to pistol me upon my own floor--and to carry me
off by force, as you purpose, to a common gaol. Kill Dr. Sturk, indeed!
Are you mad, Sir? I who offered a fee of five hundred guineas even to
bring him to speech! I who took the best medical advice in London on
his behalf; I who have been his friend only too much with my Lord
Castlemallard, and who, to stay his creditors, and enable his family to
procure for him the best medical attendance, and to afford him, in
short, the best chance of recovery and life, have, where you neither
lent or bestowed a shilling--poured out my money as profusely as you,
Sir, have poured out my blood, every drop of which, Sir, shall cost you
a slice of your estate. But even without Sturk's speaking one word, I've
evidence which escaped you, conceited blockhead, and which, though the
witness is as mad almost as yourself, will yet be enough to direct the
hand of justice to the right man. There is a Charles, Sir, whom all
suspect, who awaits trial, judgment, and death in this case, the
wretched Charles Nutter of the Mills, Sir, whose motive is patent, and
on whose proceedings a light will, I believe, be thrown by the evidence
of Zekiel Irons, whatever that evidence may be worth.'

'I don't care to tell you, Sir, that 'tis partly on the evidence of that
same Zekiel Irons that I've arrested you,' said Mr. Justice Lowe.

'Zekiel Irons, me! What Zekiel Irons charge me with the crime which he
was here, not two hours since, fastening on oath upon Charles Nutter!
Why, Sir, he asked me to bring him to your residence in the morning,
that he might swear to the information which he repeated in my presence,
and of which there's a note in that desk. 'Pon my life, Sir, 'tis an
agreeable society, this; bedlam broke loose--the mad directing the mad,
and both falling foul of the sane. One word from Doctor Sturk, Sir, will
blast you, so soon as, please Heaven, he shall speak.'

'He has spoken, Sir,' replied Lowe, whose angry passions were roused
by the insults of Dangerfield, and who had, for the moment, lost his
customary caution.

'Ha!' cried Dangerfield, with a sort of gasp, and a violent smirk, the
joyousness of which was, however, counteracted by a lurid scowl and a
wonderful livid glare in his wild eyes; 'ha! he has? Bravo, Sir,
bravissimo!' and he smirked wider and wider, and beat his uninjured hand
upon the table, like a man applauding the denouement of a play. 'Well,
Sir; and notwithstanding his declaration, you arrest me upon the
monstrous assertion of a crazy clerk, you consummate blockhead!'

''Twon't do, Sir, you sha'n't sting me by insult into passion; nor
frighten me by big words and big looks into hesitation. My duty's clear,
and be the consequences what they may, I'll carry the matter through.'

'Frighten you! ha, ha, ha!' and Dangerfield glared at his bloody
shirt-sleeve, and laughed a chilly sneer; 'no, Sir, but I'll punish you,
with Doctor Sturk's declaration against the babble of poor Zekiel Irons.
I'll quickly close your mouth.'

'Sir, I never made it a practice yet to hide evidence from a prisoner.
Why should I desire to put you out of the world, if you're innocent?
Doctor Sturk, Sir, has denounced you distinctly upon oath. Charles
Archer, going by the name of Paul Dangerfield, and residing in this
house, called the "Brass Castle," as the person who attempted to murder
him in the Butcher's Wood.'

'What, Sir? Doctor Sturk denounce me! Fore heaven, Sir--it seems to
me you've all lost your wits. Doctor Sturk!--? Doctor Sturk charge me
with having assaulted him! why--curse it, Sir--it can't possibly be--you
can't believe it; and, if he said it, the man's raving still.'

'He has said it, Sir.'

'Then, Sir, in the devil's name, didn't it strike you as going rather
fast to shoot me on my own hearth-stone--me, knowing all you do about
me--with no better warrant than the talk of a man with a shattered
brain, awakening from a lethargy of months? Sir, though the laws afford
no punishment exemplary enough for such atrocious precipitation, I
promise you I'll exact the last penalty they provide; and now, Sir, take
me where you will; I can't resist. Having shot me, do what you may to
interrupt my business; to lose my papers and accounts; to prevent my
recovery, and to blast my reputation--Sir, I shall have compensation for
all.'

So saying, Dangerfield, with his left hand, clapt his cocked hat on, and
with a ghastly smile nodded a farewell to Mrs. Jukes, who, sobbing
plentifully, had placed his white surtout, cloakwise over his shoulders,
buttoning it about his throat. The hall-door stood open; the candles
flared in the night air, and with the jaunty, resolute step of a man
marching to victory and revenge, he walked out, and lightly mounted to
his place. She saw the constables get in, and one glimpse more of the
white grim face she knew so well, the defiant smirk, the blood-stained
shirt-sleeve, and the coach-door shut. At the crack of the whip and the
driver's voice, the horses scrambled into motion, the wheels revolved,
and the master of the Brass Castle and the equipage glided away like a
magic lantern group, from before the eyes and the candle of the weeping
Mrs. Jukes.








The coach rumbled along toward Dublin at a leisurely jog.
Notwithstanding the firm front Mr. Lowe had presented, Dangerfield's
harangue had affected him unpleasantly. Cluffe's little bit of
information respecting the instrument he had seen the prisoner lay up in
his drawer on the night of the murder, and which corresponded in
description with the wounds traced upon Sturk's skull, seemed to have
failed. The handle of Dangerfield's harmless horsewhip, his mind misgave
him, was all that would come of that piece of evidence; and it was
impossible to say there might not be something in all that Dangerfield
had uttered. Is it a magnetic force, or a high histrionic vein in some
men, that makes them so persuasive and overpowering, and their passion
so formidable? But, with Dangerfield's presence, the effect of his
plausibilities and his defiance passed away. The pointed and consistent
evidence of Sturk, perfectly clear as he was upon every topic he
mentioned, and the corroborative testimony of Irons, equally distinct
and damning--the whole case blurred and disjointed, and for a moment
grown unpleasantly hazy and uncertain in the presence of that white
sorcerer, readjusted itself now that he was gone, and came out in iron
and compact relief--impregnable.

'Run boys, one of you, and open the gate of the Mills,' said Lowe, whose
benevolence, such as it was, expanded in his intense feeling of relief.
''Twill be good news for poor Mistress Nutter. She'll see her husband in
the morning.'

So he rode up to the Mills, and knocked his alarm, as we have seen and
heard, and there told his tidings to poor Sally Nutter, vastly to the
relief of Mistress Matchwell, the Blind Fiddler, and even of the sage,
Dirt Davy; for there are persons upon the earth to whom a sudden summons
of any sort always sounds like a call to judgment, and who, in any such
ambiguous case, fill up the moments of suspense with wild conjecture,
and a ghastly summing-up against themselves; can it be this--or that--or
the other old, buried, distant villainy, that comes back to take me by
the throat?

Having told his good news in a few dry words to Mrs. Sally, Mr. Lowe
superadded a caution to the dark lady down stairs, in the face of which
she, being quite reassured by this time, grinned and snapped her
fingers, and in terms defied, and even cursed the tall magistrate
without rising from the chair in which she had re-established herself in
the parlour. He mounted his hunter again, and followed the coach at a
pace which promised soon to bring him up with that lumbering conveyance;
for Mr. Lowe was one of those public officers who love their work, and
the tenant of the Brass Castle was no common prisoner, and well worth
seeing, though at some inconvenience, safely into his new lodging.

Next morning, you may be sure, the news was all over the town of
Chapelizod. All sorts of cross rumours and wild canards, of course, were
on the wind, and every new fact or fib borne to the door-step with the
fresh eggs, or the morning's milk and butter, was carried by the eager
servant into the parlour, and swallowed down with their toast and tea by
the staring company.

Upon one point all were agreed: Mr. Paul Dangerfield lay in the county
gaol, on a charge of having assaulted Dr. Sturk with intent to kill him.
The women blessed themselves, and turned pale. The men looked queer when
they met one another. It was altogether so astounding--Mr. Dangerfield
was so rich--so eminent--so moral--so charitable--so above temptation.
It had come out that he had committed, some said three, others as many
as fifteen secret murders. All the time that the neighbours had looked
on his white head in church as the very standard of probity, and all the
prudential virtues rewarded, they were admiring and honouring a masked
assassin. They had been bringing into their homes and families an
undivulged and terrible monster. The wher-wolf had walked the homely
streets of their village. The ghoul, unrecognised, had prowled among the
graves of their church-yard. One of their fairest princesses, the lady
of Belmont, had been on the point of being sacrificed to a vampire.
Horror, curiosity, and amazement, were everywhere.

Charles Nutter, it was rumoured, was to be discharged on bail early, and
it was mooted in the club that a deputation of the neighbours should
ride out to meet him at the boundaries of Chapelizod, welcome him there
with an address, and accompany him to the Mills as a guard of honour;
but cooler heads remembered the threatening and unsettled state of
things at that domicile, and thought that Nutter would, all things
considered, like a quiet return best; which view of the affair was,
ultimately, acquiesced in.

For Mary Matchwell, at the Mills, the tidings which had thrown the town
into commotion had but a solitary and a selfish interest. She was glad
that Nutter was exculpated. She had no desire that the king should take
his worldly goods to which she intended helping herself: otherwise he
might hang or drown for ought she cared. Dirty Davy, too, who had quaked
about his costs, was greatly relieved by the turn which things had
taken; and the plain truth was that, notwithstanding his escape from the
halter, things looked very black and awful for Charles Nutter and his
poor little wife, Sally.

Doctor Toole, at half-past nine, was entertaining two or three of the
neighbours, chiefly in oracular whispers, by the fire in the great
parlour of the Phoenix, when he was interrupted by Larry, the waiter,
with--

'Your horse is at the door, docther' (Toole was going into town, but was
first to keep an appointment at Doctor Sturk's with Mr. Lowe), 'and,'
continued Larry, 'there's a fat gentleman in the blue room wants to see
you, if you plase.'

'Hey?--ho! let's see then,' said little Toole, bustling forth with an
important air. 'The blue room, hey?'

When he opened the door of that small apartment there stood a stout,
corpulent, rather seedy and dusty personage, at the window, looking out
and whistling with his hat on. He turned lazily about as Toole entered,
and displayed the fat and forbidding face of Dirty Davy.

'Oh! I thought it might be professionally, Sir,' said Toole, a little
grandly; for he had seen the gentleman before, and had, by this time,
found out all about him, and perceived he had no chance of a fee.

'It is professionally, Sir,' quoth Dirty Davy, 'if you'll be so
obleeging as to give me five minutes.'

With that amiable egotism which pervades human nature, it will be
observed, each gentleman interpreted 'professionally' as referring to
his own particular calling.

So Toole declared himself ready and prepared to do his office, and Dirty
Davy commenced.

'You know me, I believe, Sir?'

'Mr. David O'Reegan, as I believe,' answered Toole.

'The same, Sir,' replied Davy. 'I'm on my way, Sir, to the Mills, where
my client, Mrs. Nutter (here Toole uttered a disdainful grunt), resides;
and I called at your house, doctor, and they sent me here; and I am
desirous to prove to you, Sir, as a friend of Miss Sarah Harty, styling
herself Mrs. Nutter, that my client's rights are clear and irresistible,
in order that you may use any interest you may have with that
ill-advised faymale--and I'm told she respects your advice and opinion
highly--to induce her to submit without further annoyance; and I tell
you, in confidence, she has run herself already into a very sarious
predicament.'

'Well, Sir, I'll be happy to hear you,' answered Toole.

''Tis no more, Sir, than I expected from your well-known candour,'
replied Dirty Davy, with the unctuous politeness with which he treated
such gentlemen as he expected to make use of. 'Now, Sir, I'll open our
case without any reserve or exaggeration to you, Sir, and that, Doctor
Toole, is what I wouldn't do to many beside yourself. The facts is in a
nutshell. We claim our conjugal rights. Why, Sir? Because, Sir, we
married the oppugnant, Charles Nutter, gentleman, of the Mills, and so
forth, on the 7th of April, Anno Domini, 1750, in the Church of St.
Clement Danes, in London, of which marriage this, Sir, is a verbatim
copy of the certificate. Now, Sir, your client--I mane your
friend--Misthress Mary Harty, who at present affects the state and
usurps the rights of marriage against my client--the rightful Mrs.
Nutter, performed and celebrated a certain pretended marriage with the
same Charles Nutter, in Chapelizod Church, on the 4th of June, 1758,
seven years and ten months, wanting three days, subsequent to the
marriage of my client. Well, Sir, I see exactly, Sir, what you'd ask:
"Is the certificate genuine?"'

Toole grunted an assent.

'Well, Sir, upon that point I have to show you this,' and he handed him
a copy of Mr. Luke Gamble's notice served only two days before, to the
effect that, having satisfied himself by enquiring on the spot of the
authenticity of the certificate of the marriage of Charles Nutter of the
Mills, and so forth, to Mary Duncan, his client did not mean to dispute
it. 'And, Sir, further, as we were preparing evidence in support of my
client's and her maid's affidavit, to prove her identity with the Mary
Duncan in question, having served your client--I mane, Sir, asking your
pardon again--your friend, with a notice that such corroboratory
evidence being unnecessary, we would move the court, in case it were
pressed for, to give us the costs of procuring it, Mr. Luke Gamble
fortwith struck, on behalf of his client, and admitted the sufficiency
of the evidence. Now, Sir, I mention these things, not as expecting you
to believe them upon my statement, you see, but simply to enquire of Mr.
Gamble whether they be true or no; and if true, Sir, upon his admission,
then, Sir, I submit we're entitled to your good offices, and the
judicious inthurfarence of the Rev. Mr. Roach, your respectable priest,
Sir.'

'My friend, Sir, not my priest. I'm a Churchman, Sir, as everybody
knows.'

'Of course, Sir--I ask your pardon again, Doctor Toole--Sir, your friend
to induce your client---friend I mane again, Sir--Mistress Sarah
Harty, formerly housekeeper of Mr. Charless (so he pronounced it)
Nutther, gentleman, of the Mills, and so forth, to surrendher quiet and
peaceable possession of the premises and chattels, and withdraw from her
tortuous occupation dacently, and without provoking the consequences,
which must otherwise follow in the sevarest o' forms;' or, as he
pronounced it, 'fawrums.'

'The sevarest o' grandmothers. Humbug and flummery! Sir,' cried Toole,
most unexpectedly incensed, and quite scarlet.

'D'ye mane I'm a liar, Sir? Is that what you mane?' demanded Dirty Davy,
suddenly, like the doctor, getting rid of his ceremonious politeness.

'I mane what I mane, and that's what I mane,' thundered Toole,
diplomatically.

'Then, tell your friend to prepare for consequences,' retorted Dirty
Davy, with a grin.

'And make my compliments to your client, or conjuror, or wife, or
whatever she is, and tell her that whenever she wants her dirty work
done, there's plenty of other Dublin blackguards to be got to do it,
without coming to Docther Thomas Toole, or the Rev. Father Roach.'

Which sarcasm he delivered with killing significance, but Dirty Davy had
survived worse thrusts than that.

'She's a conjuror, is she? I thank you, Sir.'

'You're easily obliged, Sir,' says Toole.

'We all know what that manes. And these documents sworn to by my
client and myself, is a pack o' lies! Betther and betther! I thank ye
again, Sir.'

'You're welcome, my honey,' rejoined Toole, affectionately.

'An' you live round the corner. I know your hall-door, Sir--a light
brown, wid a brass knocker.'

'Which is a fine likeness iv your own handsome face, Sir,' retorted
Toole.

'An' them two documents, Sir, is a fabrication and a forgery, backed up
wid false affidavits?' continued Mr. O'Reegan.

'Mind that, Larry,' says the doctor, with a sudden inspiration
addressing the waiter, who had peeped in; 'he admits that them two
documents you see there, is forgeries, backed up with false affidavits;
you heard him say so, and I'll call you to prove it.'

'You lie!' said Dirty Davy, precipitately, for he was quite
disconcerted at finding his own sophistical weapons so unexpectedly
turned against him.

'You scum o' the airth!' cried Toole, hitting him, with his clenched
fist, right upon the nose, so vigorous a thump, that his erudite head
with a sonorous crash hopped off the wainscot behind it; 'you lying
scullion!' roared the doctor, instantaneously repeating the blow, and
down went Davy, and down went the table with dreadful din, and the
incensed doctor bestrode his prostrate foe with clenched fists and
flaming face, and his grand wig all awry, and he panting and scowling.

'Murdher, murdher, murdher!' screamed Dirty Davy, who was not much of
a Spartan, and relished nothing of an assault and battery but the costs
and damages.

'You--you--you'

'Murdher--help--help--murdher--murdher!'

'Say it again, you cowardly, sneaking, spying viper; say it again,
can't you?'

It was a fine tableau, and a noble study of countenance and attitude.

'Sich a bloody nose I never seen before,' grinned Larry rubbing his
hands over the exquisite remembrance. 'If you only seed him, flat on his
back, the great ould shnake, wid his knees and his hands up bawling
murdher; an' his big white face and his bloody nose in the middle, like
nothin' in nature, bedad, but the ace iv hearts in a dirty pack.'

How they were separated, and who the particular persons that interposed,
what restoratives were resorted to, how the feature looked half an hour
afterwards, and what was the subsequent demeanour of Doctor Toole, upon
the field of battle, I am not instructed; my letters stop short at the
catastrophe, and run off to other matters.

Doctor Toole's agitations upon such encounters did not last long. They
blew off in a few thundering claps of bravado and defiance in the second
parlour of the Phoenix, where he washed his hands and readjusted his
wig and ruffles, and strutted forth, squaring his elbows, and nodding
and winking at the sympathising waiters in the inn hall; and with a half
grin at Larry--

'Well, Larry, I think I showed him Chapelizod, hey?' said the doctor,
buoyantly, to that functionary, and marched diagonally across the broad
street toward Sturk's house, with a gait and a countenance that might
have overawed an army.









In entering the front parlour from whence, in no small excitement, there
issued the notes of a course diapason, which he fancied was known to
him, he found Mr. Justice Lowe in somewhat tempestuous conference with
the visitor.

He was, in fact, no other than Black Dillon; black enough he looked just
now. He had only a moment before returned from a barren visit to the
Brass Castle, and was in no mood to be trifled with.

''Twasn't I, Sir, but Mr. Dangerfield, who promised you five hundred
guineas,' said Mr. Lowe, with a dry nonchalance.

'Five hundred fiddles,' retorted Doctor Dillon--his phrase was coarser,
and Toole at that moment entering the door, and divining the situation
from the doctor's famished glare and wild gestures, exploded, I'm sorry
to say in a momentary burst of laughter, into his cocked hat. 'Twas
instantly stifled, however; and when Dillon turned his flaming eyes upon
him, the little doctor made him a bow of superlative gravity, which the
furious hero of the trepan was too full of his wrongs to notice in any
way.

'I was down at his house, bedad, the "Brass Castle," if you plase, and
not a brass farthin' for my pains, nothing there but an ould woman, as
ould and as ugly as himself, or the divil--be gannies! An' he's
levanted, or else tuck for debt. Brass Castle! brass forehead, bedad.
Brass, like Goliath, from head to heels; an' by the heels he's laid,
I'll take my davy, considherin' at his laysure which is strongest--a
brass castle or a stone jug. An' where, Sir, am I to get my five hundred
guineas--where, Sir?' he thundered, staring first in Lowe's face, then
in Toole's, and dealing the table a lusty blow at each interrogatory.

'I think, Sir,' said Lowe, anticipating Toole, 'you'd do well to
consider the sick man, Sir.' The noise was certainly considerable.

'I don't know, Sir, that the sick man's considherin' me much,' retorted
Doctor Dillon. 'Sick man--sick grandmother's aunt! If you can't speak
like a man o' sense, don't spake, at any rate, like a justice o' the
pace. Sick man, indeed! why there's not a crature livin' barrin' a
natural eediot, or an apothecary, that doesn't know the man's dead; he's
dead, Sir; but 'tisn't so with me, an' I can't get on without vittles,
and vittles isn't to be had without money; that's logic, Mr. Justice;
that's a medical fact Mr. Docthor. An' how am I to get my five hundred
guineas? I say, you and you--the both o' ye--that prevented me of
going last night to his brass castle--brass snuff-box--there isn't room
to stand in it, bedad--an' gettin' my money. I hold you both liable to
me--one an' t'other--the both o' ye.'

'Why, Sir,' said Lowe, ''tis a honorarium.'

''Tis no such thing, Sir; 'tis a contract,' thundered Dillon, pulling
Dangerfield's note of promise from his pocket, and dealing it a mighty
slap with the back of his hand.

'Contract or no, Sir, there's nobody liable for it but himself.'

'We'll try that, Sir; and in the meantime, what the divil am I to do,
I'd be glad to know; for strike me crooked if I have a crown piece to
pay the coachman. Trepan, indeed; I'm nately trepanned myself.'

'If you'll only listen, Sir, I'll show you your case is well enough. Mr.
Dangerfield, as you call him, has not left the country; and though he's
arrested, 'tisn't for debt. If he owes you the money, 'tis your own
fault if you don't make him pay it, for I'm credibly informed he's worth
more than a hundred thousand pounds.'

'And where is he, Sir?' demanded Black Dillon, much more cheerfully and
amicably. 'I hope I see you well, Doctor Toole.'

That learned person acknowledged the somewhat tardy courtesy, and Lowe
made answer:

'He lies in the county gaol, Sir, on a serious criminal charge; but a
line from me, Sir, will, I think, gain you admission to him forthwith.'

'I'll be much obliged for it, Sir,' answered Dillon. 'What o'clock is
it?' he asked of Toole; for though it is believed he owned a watch, it
was sometimes not about him; and while Lowe scribbled a note, Toole
asked in a dignified way--

'Have you seen our patient, Sir?'

'Not I. Didn't I see him last night? The man's dead. He's in the last
stage of exhaustion with an inflammatory pulse. If you feed him up he'll
die of inflammation; and if you don't he'll die of wakeness. So he lies
on the fatal horns of a dilemma, you see; an' not all the men in
Derry'll take him off them alive. He's gone, Sir. Pell's coming, I hear.
I'd wait if I could; but I must look afther business; and there's no
good to be done here. I thank you, Mr. Lowe--Sir--your most obedient
servant, Doctor Toole.' And with Lowe's note in his breeches' pocket, he
strode out to the steps, and whistled for his coachman, who drove his
respectable employer tipsily to his destination.

I dare say the interview was characteristic; but I can find no account
of it. I am pretty sure, however, that he did not get a shilling. So at
least he stated in his declaration, in the action against Lowe, in which
he, or rather his attorney, was nonsuited, with grievous loss of costs.
And judging by the sort of esteem in which Mr. Dangerfield held Black
Dillon, I fancy that few things would have pleased him better in his
unfortunate situation than hitting that able practitioner as hard as
might be.

Just as he drove away, poor little Mrs. Sturk looked in.

'Is there anything, Ma'am?' asked Toole, a little uneasily.

'Only--only, I think he's just a little frightened--he's so nervous you
know--by that Dublin doctor's loud talking--and he's got a kind of
trembling--a shivering.'

'Eh--a shivering, Ma'am?' said Toole. 'Like a man that's taken a cold,
eh?'

'Oh, he hasn't got cold--I'm sure--there's no danger of that. It's only
nervous; so I covered him up with another pair of blankets, and gave him
a hot drink.'

'Very good, Ma'am; I'll follow you up in a minute.'

'And even if it was, you know he shakes off cold in no time, he has such
a fine constitution.'

'Yes, Ma'am--that's true--very good, Ma'am. I'll be after you.'

So up stairs went Mrs. Sturk in a fuss.

'That's it,' said Toole so soon as they were alone, nodding two or three
times dejectedly, and looking very glum. 'It's set in--the
inflammation--it's set in, Sir. He's gone. That's the rigor.'

'Poor gentleman,' said Lowe, after a short pause, 'I'm much concerned
for him, and for his family.'

''Tis a bad business,' said Toole, gloomily, like a man that's
frightened. And he followed Mrs. Sturk, leaving Lowe adjusting his
papers in the parlour.

Toole found his patient laden with blankets, and shivering like a man in
an ague, with blue sunken face. And he slipped his hand under the
clothes, and took his pulse, and said nothing but--'Ay--ay--ay'--quietly
to himself, from time to time, as he did so; and Sturk--signing, as well
as he could, that he wanted a word in his ear--whispered, as well as his
chattering teeth would let him,

'You know what this is.'

'Well--well--there now, there; drink some of this,' said Toole, a little
flurried, and trying to seem cool.

'I think he's a little bit better, doctor,' whispered poor little Mrs.
Sturk, in Toole's ear.

'Twill pass away. Ma'am.'

Toole was standing by the bedside, looking rather woefully and
frightened on Sturk's face, and patting and smoothing the coverlet with
the palm of his stumpy, red hand; and whispering to himself from time to
time, 'Yes, yes,' although with rather a troubled and helpless air.

Just then came the roll of a coach to the door, and a long peal at the
knocker; and little Toole ran down to meet the great Doctor Pell in the
hall. He was in, in a moment, and turned aside with Toole into the
drawing-room. And Toole's voice was heard pretty volubly. It was only a
conference of about two minutes. And Dr. Pell said in his usual tall
way, as they came out--

'How long ago, Sir?'

'About ten--no, hardly so much--eight minutes ago,' answered Toole, as
he followed that swift phantom up the stairs.

'Your most obedient, Ma'am,' said the slim and lofty doctor,
parenthetically saluting the good lady; and he stood by the bedside,
having laid his muff on the chair.

'Well, Sir, and how do you feel? There now, that will do, Sir; don't
mind speaking; I see. And he put his hand under the clothes, and laid
it on Sturk's arm, and slid it down to his hand, and felt his pulse.

'And he's been near ten minutes this way?' said the doctor.

'Oh, he was a great deal worse; 'tis a vast deal better now; isn't it,
Doctor Toole?'

'The rigor is subsiding, then. Has he had a sweat, Ma'am?' said Pell.

'Oh, no--nothing like--quite nice and cool, doctor--and no fever; nice
quiet sleep; and his appetite wonderful; tell him, Doctor Toole.'

'Oh, yes, Ma'am--Doctor Pell knows; I told him all, Ma'am,' said Toole,
who was looking with a blank and dismal sort of contemplation upon
Sturk's fallen countenance.

'Well, Ma'am,' said Pell, as he looked on his watch, 'this rigor, you
see, will soon pass away, and you're doing everything we could wish, and
(for he found he had time to scribble a prescription), we'll just order
him a trifle. Good-day, Sir. Your most obedient, Ma'am.'

'Pen and ink in the drawing-room, Doctor Pell,' said Toole,
reverentially.

'Oh! no, no, Madam, excuse me,' murmured Doctor Pell, gently pressing
back Mrs. Sturk's fee, the residuum of Dangerfield's bounty, with his
open palm.

'Oh, but Doctor Pell,' urged she, in a persuasive aside, half behind
him, in the shadow of the doorway.

'Pray, Madam, no more--pardon me,' and Doctor Pell, with a peremptory
bow, repelled his fee.

Why do physicians take their honest earnings in this clandestine
way--transacted like favours, secret, sweet, and precious; and pocketed
in dark corners, and whispers, like the wages of sin? Cold Doctor Pell
here refused a very considerable fee. He could on occasion behave
handsomely; but I can't learn that blustering, hilarious Doctor Rogerson
ever refused his.

And the doctor descended, not hastily, but very swiftly, and was in the
drawing-room, and the door shut.

'Gone, poor gentleman!' said Toole, in an under tone--his phraseology
became refined in Pell's presence; he'd have said 'poor devil,' or 'poor
dog,' if he had been with Doctor Rogerson.

Pell held the pen in his thin lips, while he tore off half-a-sheet of
paper, and only shook his head funereally.

So, taking the pen in his fingers, he said, 'We'll give him so and so,
if you approve.'

'Very good, Sir,' said Toole, deferentially; and Pell, not seeming to
hear, dashed off a few spattered lines, with necromantic circles and
zigzags at the end of each.

When Sturk afterwards saw that paper in the fingers of the maid, being
very weak, he did not care to speak; but he signed with a little motion
of his head, and she leaned down to listen.

'Recipe?' whispered the doctor; 'put it--in--the fire;' and he shut his
eyes--tired.

Pell, looking again at his watch, was Doctor Toole's very obedient
servant, and was waylaid by poor little Mrs. Sturk on the lobby.

'Well, Madam, we've put our heads together, and ordered a little matter,
and that rigor--that shivering fit--will subside; and we trust he'll be
easier then; and you've a very competent adviser in Doctor a--a----'

'Toole,' suggested the eager little woman.

'Doctor Toole, Madam, and he'll direct whatever may be necessary; and
should he wish to consult again, you can send for me; but he's quite
competent, Madam, and he'll tell you all we think.'

He had got to the end of the stairs while talking, and made his adieux,
and glided down and out; and before poor little Mrs. Sturk bethought her
how little she had got from him, she heard the roll of his coach wheels
whirling him back again to Dublin. I believe few doctors grow so
accustomed to the ghastly eclaircissement as not very willingly to
shirk it when they may.

Toole shrank from it, too, and dodged, and equivocated, and evaded all
he could; but he did admit there was an unfavourable change; and when he
had gone--promising to be back at four o'clock--poor little Mrs. Sturk
broke down--all alone in the drawing-room--and cried a passionate flood
of tears; and thinking she was too long away, dried her eyes quickly,
and ran up, and into Barney's room with a smile on; and she battled with
the evil fear; and hope, that faithful angel that clings to the last,
hovered near her with blessed illusions, until an hour came, next day,
in the evening, about four o'clock, when from Barney's room there came a
long, wild cry. It was 'his poor foolish little Letty'--the long
farewell--and the 'noble Barney' was gone. The courtship and the married
days--all a faded old story now; and a few days later, reversed arms,
and muffled drums, and three volleys in the church-yard, and a little
file of wondering children, dressed in black, whom the old general
afterwards took up in his arms, one by one, very kindly, and kissed,
and told them they were to come and play in Belmont whenever they liked,
and to eat fruit in the garden, and a great deal more; for all which a
poor little lady, in a widow's cap, and a lonely room, hard-by, was very
grateful.





 NUTTER OF THE MILLS, AND HOW MR. MERVYN RECEIVED
THE NEWS.


Little Doctor Toole came out feeling rather queer and stunned from
Sturk's house. It was past three o'clock by this time, and it had
already, in his eyes, a changed and empty look, as his upturned eye for
a moment rested upon its gray front, and the window-panes glittering in
the reddening sun. He looked down the street towards the turnpike, and
then up it, towards Martin's-row and the Mills. And he bethought him
suddenly of poor Sally Nutter, and upbraided himself, smiting the point
of his cane with a vehement stab upon the pavement, for having forgotten
to speak to Lowe upon her case. Perhaps, however, it was as well he had
not, inasmuch as there were a few not unimportant facts connected with
that case about which he was himself in the dark.

Mr. Gamble's conducting clerk had gone up stairs to Mrs. Nutter's door,
and being admitted, had very respectfully asked leave to open, for that
lady's instruction, a little statement which he was charged to make.

This was in substance, that Archibald Duncan, Mary Matchwell's husband,
was in Dublin, and had sworn informations against her for bigamy; and
that a warrant having been issued for her arrest upon that charge, the
constables had arrived at the Mills for the purpose of executing it, and
removing the body of the delinquent, M. M., to the custody of the
turnkey; that measures would be taken on the spot to expel the persons
who had followed in her train; and that Mr. Charles Nutter himself would
arrive in little more than an hour, to congratulate his good wife,
Sally, on the termination of their troubles, and to take quiet
possession of his house.

You can imagine how Sally Nutter received all this, with clasped hands
and streaming eyes, looking in the face of the man of notices and
attested copies, unable to speak--unable quite to believe. But before he
came to the end of his dry and delightful narrative, a loud yell and a
scuffle in the parlour were heard; a shrilly clamour of warring voices;
a dreadful crash of glass: a few curses and oaths in basses and
barytones; and some laughter from the coachmen, who viewed the fray
from outside through the window; and a brief, wild, and garrulous
uproar, which made little Sally Nutter--though by this time used to
commotion--draw back with her hands to her heart, and hold her breath.
It was the critical convulsion; the evil spirit was being eliminated,
and the tenement, stunned, bruised, and tattered, about to be at peace.

Of Charles Nutter's doings and adventures during the terrible interval
between his departure on the night of Mary Matchwell's first visit to
the Mills, and his return on this evening to the same abode, there is a
brief outline, in the first person, partly in answer to questions, and
obviously intended to constitute a memorandum for his attorney's use. I
shall reprint it with your leave--as it is not very long--verbatim.

'When that woman, Sir, came out to the Mills,' says this document, 'I
could scarce believe my eyes; I knew her temper; she was always damnably
wicked; but I had found out all about her long ago; and I was amazed at
her audacity. What she said was true--we were married; or rather, we
went through the ceremony, at St. Clement Danes, in London, in the year
'50. I could not gainsay that; but I well knew what she thought was
known but to herself and another. She had a husband living then. We
lived together little more than three months. We were not a year parted
when I found out all about him; and I never expected more trouble from
her.

'I knew all about him then. But seventeen years bring many changes; and
I feared he might be dead. He was a saddler in Edinburgh, and his name
was Duncan. I made up my mind to go thither straight. Next morning the
Lovely Betty, packet, was to sail for Holyhead. I took money, and set
out without a word to anybody. The wretch had told my poor wife, and
showed her the certificate, and so left her half mad.

'I swore to her 'twas false. I told her to wait a bit and she would see.
That was everything passed between us. I don't think she half understood
what I said, for she was at her wits' ends. I was scarce better myself
first. 'Twas a good while before I resolved on this course, and saw my
way, and worse thoughts were in my head; but so soon as I made up my
mind to this I grew cool. I don't know how it happened that my
foot-prints by the river puzzled them; 'twas all accident; I was
thinking of no such matter; I did not go through the village, but
through the Knockmaroon gate; 'twas dark by that time; I only met two
men with a cart--they did not know me--Dublin men, I think. I crossed
the park in a straight line for Dublin; I did not meet a living soul;
'twas dark, but not very dark. When I reached the Butcher's Wood, all on
a sudden, I heard a horrid screech, and two blows quick, one after the
other, to my right, not three score steps away--heavy blows--they
sounded like the strokes of a man beating a carpet.

'With the first alarm, I hollo'd, and ran in the direction shouting as
I went; 'twas as I ran I heard the second blow; I saw no one, and heard
no other sound; the noise I made myself in running might prevent it. I
can't say how many seconds it took to run the distance--not many; I ran
fast; I was not long in finding the body; his white vest and small
clothes showed under the shadow; he seemed quite dead. I thought when
first I took his hand, there was a kind of a quiver in his fingers; but
that was over immediately. His eyes and mouth were a bit open; the blood
was coming very fast, and the wounds on his head looked very
deep--frightful--as I conjectured they were done with a falchion (a name
given to a heavy wooden sword resembling a New Zealand weapon); there
was blood coming from one ear, and his mouth; there was no sign of life
about him, and I thought him quite dead. I would have lifted him against
a tree, but his head looked all in a smash, and I daren't move him. I
knew him for Dr. Sturk, of the Artillery; he wore his regimentals; I did
not see his hat; his head was bare when I saw him.

'When I saw 'twas Doctor Sturk, I was frightened; he had treated me
mighty ill, and I resented it, which I did not conceal; and I thought
'twould look very much against me if I were any way mixed up in this
dreadful occurrence--especially not knowing who did it--and being alone
with the body so soon after 'twas done. I crossed the park wall
therefore; but by the time I came near Barrack-street, I grew uneasy in
my mind, lest Doctor Sturk should still have life in him, and perish for
want of help. I went down to the river-side, and washed my hands, for
there was blood upon 'em, and while so employed, by mischance I lost my
hat in the water and could not recover it. I stood for a while by the
river-bank; it was a lonely place; I was thinking of crossing there
first, I was so frightened; I changed my mind, however, and went round
by Bloody-bridge.

'The further I went the more fearful I grew, lest Sturk should die for
want of help that I might send him; and although I thought him dead, I
got such a dread of this over me as I can't describe. I saw two soldiers
opposite the "Royal Oak" inn, and I told them I overheard a fellow speak
of an officer that lay wounded in the Butcher's Wood, not far from the
park-wall, and gave them half-a-crown to have search made, which they
promised, and took the money.

'I crossed Bloody-bridge, and got into a coach, and so to Luke Gamble's.
I told him nothing of Sturk; I had talked foolishly to him, and did not
know what even he might think. I told him all about M. M.'s, that is Mary
Duncan's turning up; she went by that name in London, and kept a
lodging-house. I took his advice on the matter, and sailed next morning.
The man Archie Duncan had left Edinburgh, but I traced him to Carlisle
and thence to York, where I found him. He was in a very poor way, and
glad to hear that Demirep was in Dublin, and making money. When I came
back I was in the Hue-and-Cry for the assault on Sturk.

'I took no precaution, not knowing what had happened; but 'twas night
when we arrived, Duncan and I, and we went straight to Gamble's and he
concealed me. I kept close within his house, except on one night, when I
took coach. I was under necessity, as you shall hear, to visit
Chapelizod. I got out in the hollow of the road by the Knockmaroon pond,
in the park; an awful night it was--the night of the snow-storm, when
the brig was wrecked off the Black Rock, you remember. I wanted to get
some papers necessary to my case against Mary Duncan. I had the key of
the glass door; the inside fastening was broke, and there was no trouble
in getting in. But the women had sat up beyond their hour, and saw me. I
got the papers, however, and returned, having warned them not to speak.
I ventured out of doors but once more, and was took on a warrant for
assaulting Sturk. 'Twas the women talking as they did excited the
officer's suspicions.

'I have lain in prison since. The date of my committal and discharge
are, I suppose, there.'

And so ends this rough draft, with the initials, I think, in his own
hands, C. N., at the foot.

At about half-past four o'clock Nutter came out to the Mills in a coach.
He did not drive through Chapelizod; he was shy, and wished to feel his
way a little. So he came home privily by the Knockmaroon Park-gate. Poor
little Sally rose into a sort of heroine. With a wild cry, and 'Oh,
Charlie!' she threw her arms about his neck; and the 'good little
crayture,' as Magnolia was wont to call her, had fainted. Nutter said
nothing, but carried her in his arms to the sofa, and himself sobbed
very violently for about a minute, supporting her tenderly. She came to
herself very quickly, and hugged her Charlie with such a torrent of
incoherent endearments, welcomes, and benedictions as I cannot at all
undertake to describe. Nutter didn't speak. His arms were about her, and
with wet eyes, and biting his nether-lip, and smiling, he looked into
her poor little wild, delighted face with an unspeakable world of
emotion and affection beaming from the homely lines and knots of that
old mahogany countenance; and the maids smiling, blessing, courtesying,
and welcoming him home again, added to the pleasant uproar which amazed
even the tipsy coachman from the hall.

'Oh! Charlie, I have you fast, my darling. Oh! but it's wonderful; you,
yourself--my Charlie, your own self--never, never, oh! never to part
again!' and so on.

And so for a rapturous hour, it seemed as if they had passed the dark
valley, and were immortal; and no more pain, sorrow, or separation for
them. And, perhaps, these blessed illusions are permitted now and again
to mortals, like momentary gleams of paradise, and distant views of the
delectable mountains, to cheer poor pilgrims with a foretaste of those
meetings beyond the river, where the separated and beloved shall
embrace.

It is not always that the person most interested in a rumour is first to
hear it. It was reported in Chapelizod, early that day, that Irons, the
clerk, had made some marvellous discovery respecting Lord Dunoran, and
the murder of which an English jury had found that nobleman guilty. Had
people known that Mervyn was the son of that dishonoured peer--as in
that curious little town they would, no doubt, long since have, at
least, suspected, had he called himself by his proper patronymic
Mordaunt--he would not have wanted a visitor to enlighten him
half-an-hour after the rumour had began to proclaim itself in the
streets and public haunts of the village. No one, however, thought of
the haughty and secluded young gentleman who lived so ascetic a life at
the Tiled House, and hardly ever showed in the town, except in church on
Sundays; and who when he rode on his black hunter into Dublin, avoided
the village, and took the high-road by Inchicore.

When the report did reach him, and he heard that Lowe, who knew all
about it, was at the Phoenix, where he was holding a conference with a
gentleman from the Crown Office, half wild with excitement, he hurried
thither. There, having declared himself to the magistrate and his
companion, in that little chamber where Nutter was wont to transact his
agency business, and where poor Sturk had told down his rent, guinea by
guinea, with such a furious elation, on the morning but one before he
received his death-blow, he heard, with such feelings as may be
imagined, the magistrate read aloud, not only the full and clear
information of Irons, but the equally distinct deposition of Doctor
Sturk, and was made aware of the complete identification of the
respectable and vivacious Paul Dangerfield with the dead and damned
Charles Archer!

On hearing all this, the young man rode straight to Belmont, where he
was closeted with the general for fully twenty minutes. They parted in a
very friendly way, but he did not see the ladies. The general, however,
no sooner bid him farewell at the door-steps than he made his way to the
drawing-room, and, big with his amazing secret, first, in a very grave
and almost agitated way, told little 'Toodie,' as he called his
daughter, to run away and leave him together with Aunt Rebecca, which
being done, he anticipated that lady's imperious summons to explain
himself by telling her, in his blunt, soldierly fashion, the wondrous
story.

Aunt Becky was utterly confounded. She had seldom before in her life
been so thoroughly taken in. What a marvellous turn of fortune! What a
providential deliverance and vindication for that poor young Lord
Dunoran! What an astounding exposure of that miscreant Mr. Dangerfield!

'What a blessed escape the child has had!' interposed the general with a
rather testy burst of gratitude.

'And how artfully she and my lord contrived to conceal their
engagement!' pursued Aunt Rebecca, covering her somewhat confused
retreat.

But, somehow, Aunt Rebecca was by no means angry. On the contrary,
anyone who knew her well would have perceived that a great weight was
taken off her mind.

The consequences of Dangerfield's incarceration upon these awful
charges, were not confined altogether to the Tiled House and the
inhabitants of Belmont.

No sooner was our friend Cluffe well assured that Dangerfield was in
custody of the gaoler, and that his old theory of a certain double plot
carried on by that intriguing personage, with the object of possessing
the hand and thousands of Aunt Rebecca, was now and for ever untenable,
than he wrote to London forthwith to countermand the pelican. The
answer, which in those days was rather long about coming, was not
pleasant, being simply a refusal to rescind the contract.

Cluffe, in a frenzy, carried this piece of mercantile insolence off to
his lawyer. The stout captain was, however, undoubtedly liable, and,
with a heavy heart, he wrote to beg they would, with all despatch, sell
the bird in London on his account, and charge him with the difference.
'The scoundrels!--they'll buy him themselves at half-price, and charge
me a per centage besides; but what the plague better can I do?

In due course, however, came an answer, informing Captain Cluffe that
his letter had arrived too late, as the bird, pursuant to the tenor of
his order, had been shipped for him to Dublin by the Fair Venus, with
a proper person in charge, on the Thursday morning previous. Good Mrs.
Mason, his landlady, had no idea what was causing the awful commotion in
the captain's room; the fitful and violent soliloquies; the stamping of
the captain up and down the floor; and the contusions, palpably,
suffered by her furniture. The captain's temper was not very pleasant
that evening, and he was fidgety and feverish besides, expecting every
moment a note from town to apprise him of its arrival.

However, he walked up to Belmont a week or two after, and had a very
consolatory reception from Aunt Becky. He talked upon his old themes,
and upon the subject of Puddock, was, as usual, very friendly and
intercessorial; in fact, she showed at last signs of yielding.

'Well, Captain Cluffe, tell him if he cares to come, he may come, and
be on the old friendly footing; but be sure you tell him he owes it all
to you.'

And positively, as she said so, Aunt Rebecca looked down upon her fan;
and Cluffe thought looked a little flushed, and confused too; whereat
the gallant fellow was so elated that he told her all about the pelican,
discarding as unworthy of consideration, under circumstances so
imminently promising, a little plan he had formed of keeping the bird
privately in Dublin, and looking out for a buyer.

Poor little Puddock, on the other hand, had heard, more than a week
before this message of peace arrived, the whole story of Gertrude's
engagement to Lord Dunoran, as we may now call Mr. Mervyn, with such
sensations as may be conjectured. His heart, of course, was torn; but
having sustained some score of similar injuries in that region upon
other equally harrowing occasions, he recovered upon this with all
favourable symptoms, and his wounds healed with the first intention. He
wore his chains very lightly, indeed. The iron did not enter into his
soul; and although, of course, 'he could never cease but with his life
to dwell upon the image of his fleeting dream--the beautiful nymph of
Belmont,' I have never heard that his waist grew at all slimmer, or that
his sleep or his appetite suffered during the period of his despair.

The good little fellow was very glad to hear from Cluffe, who patronised
him most handsomely, that Aunt Rebecca had consented to receive him once
more into her good graces.

'And the fact is, Puddock, I think I may undertake to promise you'll
never again be misunderstood in that quarter,' said Cluffe, with a
mysterious sort of smile.

'I'm sure, dear Cluffe, I'm grateful as I ought, for your generous
pleading on my poor behalf, and I do prize the good will of that most
excellent lady as highly as any, and owe her, beside, a debt of
gratitude for care and kindness such as many a mother would have failed
to bestow.'

'Mother, indeed! Why, Puddock, my boy, you forget you're no chicken,'
said Cluffe, a little high.

'And to-morrow I will certainly pay her my respects,' said the
lieutenant, not answering Cluffe's remark.

So Gertrude Chattesworth, after her long agitation--often despair--was
tranquil at last, and blessed in the full assurance of the love which
was henceforth to be her chief earthly happiness.

'Madam was very sly,' said Aunt Becky, with a little shake of her head,
and a quizzical smile; and holding up her folded fan between her finger
and thumb, in mimic menace as she glanced at Gertrude. 'Why, Mr.
Mordaunt, on the very day--the day we had the pleasant luncheon on the
grass--when, as I thought, she had given you your quietus--'twas quite
the reverse, and you had made a little betrothal, and duped the old
people so cleverly ever after.'

'You have forgiven me, dear aunt,' said the young lady, kissing her very
affectionately, 'but I will never quite forgive myself. In a moment of
great agitation I made a hasty promise of secrecy, which, from the
moment 'twas made, was to me a never-resting disquietude, misery, and
reproach. If you, my dearest aunt, knew, as he knows, all the
anxieties, or rather the terrors, I suffered during that agitating
period of concealment--'

'Indeed, dear Madam,' said Mordaunt--or as we may now call him, Lord
Dunoran--coming to the rescue, ''twas all my doing; on me alone rests
all the blame. Selfish it hardly was. I could not risk the loss of my
beloved; and until my fortunes had improved, to declare our situation
would have been too surely to lose her. Henceforward I have done with
mystery. I will never have a secret from her, nor she from you.'

He took Aunt Becky's hand. 'Am I, too, forgiven?'

He held it for a second, and then kissed it.

Aunt Becky smiled, with one of her pleasant little blushes, and looked
down on the carpet, and was silent for a moment; and then, as they
afterwards thought a little oddly, she said,

'That censor must be more severe than I, who would say that concealment
in matters of the heart is never justifiable; and, indeed, my dear,' she
added, quite in a humble way, 'I almost think you were right.'

Aunt Becky's looks and spirits had both improved from the moment of this
eclaircissement. A load was plainly removed from her mind. Let us hope
that her comfort and elation were perfectly unselfish. At all events,
her heart sang with a quiet joy, and her good humour was unbounded. So
she stood up, holding Lord Dunoran's hand in hers, and putting her white
arm round her niece's neck, she kissed her again and again, very
tenderly, and she said--

'How very happy, Gertrude, you must be!' and then she went quickly from
the room, drying her eyes.

Happy indeed she was, and not least in the termination of that secrecy
which was so full of self-reproach and sometimes of distrust. From the
evening of that dinner at the King's House, when in an agony of jealousy
she had almost disclosed to poor little Lily the secret of their
engagement, down to the latest moment of its concealment, her hours had
been darkened by care, and troubled with ceaseless agitations.

Everything was now going prosperously for Mervyn--or let us call him
henceforward Lord Dunoran. Against the united evidence of Sturk and
Irons, two independent witnesses, the crown were of opinion that no
defence was maintainable by the wretch, Archer. The two murders were
unambiguously sworn to by both witnesses. A correspondence, afterwards
read in the Irish House of Lords, was carried on between the Irish and
the English law officers of the crown--for the case, for many reasons,
was admitted to be momentous--as to which crime he should be first tried
for--the murder of Sturk, or that of Beauclerc. The latter was, in this
respect, the most momentous--that the cancelling of the forfeiture which
had ruined the Dunoran family depended upon it.

'But are you not forgetting, Sir,' said Mr. Attorney in consultation,
'that there's the finding of felo de se against him by the coroner's
jury?'

'No, Sir,' answered the crown solicitor, well pleased to set Mr.
Attorney right. 'The jury being sworn, found only that he came by his
death, but whether by gout in his stomach, or by other disease, or by
poison, they had no certain knowledge; there was therefore no such
coroner's verdict, and no forfeiture therefore.'

'And I'm glad to hear it, with all my heart. I've seen the young
gentleman, and a very pretty young nobleman he is,' said Mr. Attorney.
Perhaps he would not have cared if this expression of his good will had
got round to my lord.

The result was, however, that their prisoner was to be first tried in
Ireland for the murder of Doctor Barnabas Sturk.

A few pieces of evidence, slight, but sinister, also turned up. Captain
Cluffe was quite clear he had seen an instrument in the prisoner's hand
on the night of the murder, as he looked into the little bed-chamber of
the Brass Castle, so unexpectedly. When he put down the towel, he raised
it from the toilet, where it lay. It resembled the butt of a whip--was
an inch or so longer than a drumstick, and six or seven inches of the
thick end stood out in a series of circular bands or rings. He washed
the thick end of it in the basin; it seemed to have a spring in it, and
Cluffe thought it was a sort of loaded baton. In those days robbery and
assault were as common as they are like to become again, and there was
nothing remarkable in the possession of such defensive weapons.
Dangerfield had only run it once or twice hastily through the water,
rolled it in a red handkerchief, and threw it into his drawer, which he
locked. When Cluffe was shown the whip, which bore a rude resemblance to
this instrument, and which Lowe had assumed to be all that Cluffe had
really seen, the gallant captain peremptorily pooh-poohed it. 'Twas no
such thing. The whip-handle was light in comparison, and it was too long
to fit in the drawer.

Now, the awful fractures which had almost severed Sturk's skull
corresponded exactly with the wounds which such an instrument would
inflict, and a tubular piece of broken iron, about two inches long,
exactly corresponding with the shape of the loading described by Cluffe,
was actually discovered in the sewer of the Brass Castle. It had been in
the fire, and the wood or whalebone was burnt completely away. It was
conjectured that Dangerfield had believed it to be lead, and having
burnt the handle, had broken the metal which he could not melt, and made
away with it in the best way he could. So preparations were pushed
forward, and Sturk's dying declaration, sworn to, late in the evening
before his dissolution, in a full consciousness of his approaching
death, was, of course, relied on, and a very symmetrical and logical
bill lay, neatly penned, in the Crown Office, awaiting the next
commission for the county.








In the meantime our worthy little Lieutenant Puddock--by this time quite
reconciled to the new state of things, walked up to Belmont, with his
head a great deal fuller--such and so great are human vagaries--of the
interview pending between him and Aunt Becky than of the little romance
which had exploded so unexpectedly about a fortnight ago.

He actually saw Miss Gertrude and my Lord Dunoran walking side by side,
on the mulberry walk by the river; and though he looked and felt a
little queer, perhaps, a little absurd, he did not sigh, or murmur a
stanza, or suffer a palpitation; but walked up to the hall-door, and
asked for Miss Rebecca Chattesworth.

Aunt Becky received him in the drawing-room. She was looking very pale,
and spoke very little, and very gently for her. In a reconciliation
between two persons of the opposite sexes--though the ages be wide
apart--there is almost always some little ingredient of sentiment.

The door was shut, and Puddock's voice was heard in an indistinct
murmur, upon the lobby. Then there was a silence, or possibly, some
speaking in a still lower key. Then Aunt Becky was crying, and the
lieutenant's voice cooing through it. Then Aunt Becky, still crying,
said--

'A longer time than you think for, lieutenant; two years, and
more--always! And the lieutenant's voice rose again; and she
said--'What a fool I've been!' which was again lost in Puddock's
accents; and the drawing-room door opened, and Aunt Rebecca ran up
stairs, with her handkerchief to her red nose and eyes, and slammed her
bed-room door after her like a boarding-school miss.

And the general's voice was heard shouting 'luncheon' in the hall; and
Dominick repeated the announcement to Puddock, who stood, unusually pale
and very much stunned, with the handle of the open drawing-room door in
his hand, looking up toward the bed-room in an undecided sort of way, as
if he was not clear whether it was not his duty to follow Aunt Becky. On
being told a second time, however, that the general awaited him at
luncheon, he apprehended the meaning of the message, and went down to
the parlour forthwith.

The general, and my lord Dunoran, and Miss Gertrude, and honest Father
Roach, were there; and Aunt Becky being otherwise engaged, could not
come.

Puddock, at luncheon, was abstracted--frightened--silent, for the most
part; talking only two or three sentences during that sociable meal, by
fits and starts; and he laughed once abruptly at a joke he did not hear.
He also drank three glasses of port.

Aunt Rebecca met him with her hood on in the hall. She asked him, with a
faltering sort of carelessness, looking very hard at the clock, and
nearly with her back to him--

'Lieutenant, will you take a turn in the garden with me?'

To which Puddock, with almost a start--for he had not seen her till she
spoke--and, upon my word, 'tis a fact, with a blush, too--made a sudden
smile, and a bow, and a suitable reply in low tones; and forth they
sallied together, and into the garden, and up and down the same walk,
for a good while--a long while--people sometimes don't count the
minutes--with none but Peter Brian, the gardener, whom they did not see,
to observe them.

When they came to the white wicket-door of the garden, Aunt Rebecca
hastily dropped his arm, on which she had leaned; and together they
returned to the house very affably; and there Aunt Becky bid him
good-bye in a whisper, a little hastily; and Puddock, so soon as he
found Dominick, asked for the general.

He had gone down to the river; and Puddock followed. As he walked along
the court, he looked up; there was a kind of face at the window. He
smiled a great deal and raised his hat, and placed it to his heart, and
felt quite bewildered, like a man in a dream; and in this state he
marched down to the river's bank.

They had not been together for a full minute when the stout general
threw back his head, looking straight in his face; and then he stepped
first one, then another, fat little pace backward, and poked his cane
right at the ribs of the plump little lieutenant, then closing with him,
he shook both Puddock's hands in both his, with a hearty peal of
laughter.

Then he took Puddock under his arm. Puddock had to stoop to pick up his
hat which the general had dislodged. And so the general walks him slowly
towards the house; sometimes jogging his elbow a little under his ribs;
sometimes calling a halt and taking his collar in his finger and thumb,
thrusting him out a little, and eyeing him over with a sort of swagger,
and laughing and coughing, and whooping, and laughing again, almost to
strangulation; and altogether extraordinarily boisterous, and hilarious,
and familiar, as Cluffe thought, who viewed this spectacle from the
avenue.

Mr. Sterling would not have been quite so amused at a similar freak of
Mrs. Hidleberg's--but our honest general was no especial worshipper of
money--he was rich, too, and his daughter, well dowered, was about to
marry a peer, and beside all this, though he loved 'Sister Becky,' her
yoke galled him; and I think he was not altogether sorry at the notion
of a little more liberty.

At the same moment honest Peter Brien, having set his basket of winter
greens down upon the kitchen-table, electrified his auditory by telling
them, with a broad grin and an oath, that he had seen Lieutenant Puddock
and Aunt Rebecca kiss in the garden, with a good smart smack, 'by the
powers, within three yards of his elbow, when he was stooping down
cutting them greens!' At which profanity, old Mistress Dorothy, Aunt
Rebecca's maid, was so incensed that she rose and left the kitchen
without a word. The sensation there, however, was immense; and Mistress
Dorothy heard the gabble and laughter fast and furious behind her until
she reached the hall.

Captain Cluffe was asking for Aunt Rebecca when Puddock and the general
reached the hall-door, and was surprised to learn that she was not to be
seen. 'If she knew 'twas I,' he thought, 'but no matter.'

'Oh, we could have told you that; eh, Puddock?' cried the general;
''tisn't everybody can see my sister to-day, captain; a very peculiar
engagement, eh, Puddock?' and a sly wink and a chuckle.

Cluffe smiled a little, and looked rather conscious and queer, but
pleased with himself; and his eyes wandered over the front windows
hastily, to see if Aunt Becky was looking out, for he fancied there was
something in the general's quizzing, and that the lady might have said
more than she quite intended to poor little Puddock on the subject of
the gallant mediator; and that, in fact, he was somehow the theme of
some little sentimental disclosure of the lady's. What the plague else
could they both mean by quizzing Cluffe about her?

Puddock and he had not gone half-way down the short avenue, when Cluffe
said, with a sheepish smile:

'Miss Rebecca Chattesworth dropped something in her talk with you,
Puddock, I see that plain enough, my dear fellow, which the general has
no objection I should hear, and, hang it, I don't see any myself. I say,
I may as well hear it, eh? I venture to say there's no great harm in it.'

At first Puddock was reserved, but recollecting that he had been left
quite free to tell whom he pleased, he made up his mind to unbosom; and
suggested, for the sake of quiet and a longer conversation, that they
should go round by the ferry.

'No, I thank you, I've had enough of that; we can walk along as quietly
as you like, and turn a little back again if need be.'

So slowly, side by side, the brother-officers paced toward the bridge;
and little Puddock, with a serious countenance and blushing cheeks, and
looking straight before him, made his astounding disclosure.

Puddock told things in a very simple and intelligible way, and Cluffe
heard him in total silence; and just as he related the crowning fact,
that he, the lieutenant, was about to marry Miss Rebecca Chattesworth,
having reached the milestone by the footpath, Captain Cluffe raised his
foot thereupon, without a word to Puddock, and began tugging at the
strap of his legging, with a dismal red grin, and a few spluttering
curses at the artificer of the article.

'And the lady has had the condescension to say that she has liked me for
at least two years.'

'And she hating you like poison, to my certain knowledge,' laughed
Captain Cluffe, very angrily, and swallowing down his feelings. So they
walked on a little way in silence, and Cluffe, who, with his face very
red, and his mouth a good deal expanded, and down in the corners, was
looking steadfastly forward, exclaimed suddenly,--

'Well?'

'I see, Cluffe,' said Puddock; 'you don't think it prudent--you think we
mayn't be happy?'

'Prudent,' laughed Cluffe, with a variety of unpleasant meanings; and
after a while--'And the general knows of it?'

'And approves it most kindly,' said Puddock.

'What else can he do?' sneered Cluffe; ''tis a precious fancy--they
are such cheats! Why you might be almost her grand-son, my dear
Puddock, ha, ha, ha. 'Tis preposterous; you're sixteen years younger
than I.'

'If you can't congratulate me, 'twould be kinder not to say anything,
Captain Cluffe; and nobody must speak in my presence of that lady but
with proper respect; and I--I thought, Cluffe, you'd have wished me
well, and shaken hands and said something--something--'

'Oh, as for that,' said Cluffe, swallowing down his emotions again, and
shaking hands with Puddock rather clumsily, and trying to smile, 'I wish
you well, Heaven knows--everything good; why shouldn't I, by George? You
know, Puddock, 'twas I who brought you together. And--and--am I at
liberty to mention it?'

Puddock thought it better the news should be proclaimed from Belmont.

'Well, so I think myself,' said Cluffe, and relapsed into silence till
they parted, at the corner of the broad street of Chapelizod and Cluffe
walked at an astounding pace on to his lodgings.

'Here's Captain Cluffe,' said Mrs. Mason, to a plump youth, who had just
made the journey from London, and was standing with the driver of a
low-backed car, and saluted the captain, who was stalking in without
taking any notice.

'Little bill, if you please, captain.'

'What is it?' demanded the captain, grimly.

'Obediar's come, Sir.'

'Obediar!' said the captain. 'What the plague do you mean, Sir?'

'Obediar, Sir, is the name we give him. The pelican, Sir, from Messrs.
Hamburgh and Slighe.'

And the young man threw back a piece of green baize, and disclosed
Obediar, who blinked with a tranquil countenance upon the captain
through the wires of a strong wooden cage. I doubt if the captain ever
looked so angry before or since. He glared at the pelican, and ground
his teeth, and actually shook his cane in his fist; and if he had been
one bit less prudent than he was, I think Obediar would then and there
have slept with his fathers.

Cluffe whisked himself about, and plucked open the paper.

'And what the devil is all this for, Sir? ten--twelve pounds ten
shillings freightage and care on the way--and twenty-five, by George,
Sir--not far from forty pounds, Sir,' roared Cluffe.

'Where'll I bring him to, Sir?' asked the driver.

The captain bellowed an address we sha'n't print here.

'Curse him--curse the brute! forty pounds!' and the captain swore
hugely, 'you scoundrel! Drive the whole concern out of that, Sir. Drive
him away, Sir, or by Jove, I'll break every bone in your body, Sir.'

And the captain scaled the stairs, and sat down panting, and outside the
window he heard the driver advising something about putting the
captain's bird to livery, 'till sich time as he'd come to his sinses;'
and himself undertaking to wait opposite the door of his lodgings until
his fare from Dublin was paid.

Though Cluffe was occasionally swayed by the angry passions, he was, on
the whole, in his own small way, a long-headed fellow. He hated law,
especially when he had a bad case; and accordingly he went down again,
rumpling the confounded bill in his hand, and told the man that he did
not blame him for it--though the whole thing was an imposition; but
that rather than have any words about it, he'd pay the account, and have
done with it; and he stared again in the face of the pelican with an
expression of rooted abhorrence and disgust, and the mild bird clapped
its bill, perhaps expecting some refreshment, and looking upon the
captain with a serene complacency very provoking under the
circumstances.

'How the devil people can like such misshapen, idiotic-looking, selfish,
useless brutes; and, by George, it smells like a polecat--curse it! but
some people have deuced queer fancies in more matters than one. The
brute! on my soul, I'd like to shoot it.'

However, with plenty of disputation over the items, and many oaths and
vows, the gallant captain, with a heavy and wrathful heart, paid the
bill; and although he had sworn in his drawing-room that he'd eat the
pelican before Aunt Rebecca should have it, he thought better also upon
this point too, and it arrived that evening at Belmont, with his
respectful compliments.

Cluffe was soon of opinion that he was in absolute possession of his own
secret, and resolved to keep it effectually. He hinted that very evening
at mess, and afterwards at the club, that he had been managing a very
nice and delicate bit of diplomacy which not a soul of them suspected,
at Belmont; and that by George, he thought they'd stare when they heard
it. He had worked like a lord chancellor to bring it about; and he
thought all was pretty well settled, now. And the Chapelizod folk, in
general, and Puddock, as implicitly as any, and Aunt Rebecca, for that
matter, also believed to their dying day that Cluffe had managed that
match, and been a true friend to little Puddock.

Cluffe never married, but grew confoundedly corpulent by degrees, and
suffered plaguily from gout; but was always well dressed, and
courageously buckled in, and, I dare say, two inches less in girth,
thanks to the application of mechanics, than nature would have presented
him.








The excitement was high in Chapelizod when the news reached that a true
bill was found against Charles Archer for the murder of Barnabas Sturk.
Everywhere, indeed, the case was watched with uncommon interest; and
when the decisive day arrived, and the old judge, furrowed, yellow, and
cross, mounted the bench, and the jury were called over, and the
challenges began, and the grim, gentlemanlike person with the white
hair, and his right arm in a black silk sling, whispering to his
attorney and now and again pencilling, with his left hand, a line to his
counsel with that indescribable air of confidence and almost defiance,
pleaded to the indictment 'not guilty,' and the dreadful business of the
day began, the court was crowded as it seldom had been before.

A short, clear, horrible statement unfolded the case for the crown. Then
the dying deposition of Sturk was put in evidence; then Irons the clerk
was put up, and told his tale doggedly and distinctly, and was not to be
shaken. 'No, it was not true that he had ever been confined in a mad
house.' 'He had never had delirium tremens.' 'He had never heard that
his wife thought him mad.' 'Yes, it was true he had pledged silver of
his master's at the Pied Horse at Newmarket' 'He knew it was a felony,
but it was the prisoner who put it into his head and encouraged him to
do it.' 'Yes, he would swear to that.' 'He had several times spoken to
Lord Dunoran, when passing under the name of Mervyn, on the subject of
his father being wronged.' 'He never had any promise from my lord, in
case he should fix the guilt of that murder on some other than his
father.' Our friend, Captain Cluffe, was called, and delivered his
evidence in a somewhat bluff and peremptory, but on the whole effective
way.

Charles Nutter, after some whispered consultation, was also called, and
related what we have heard. 'Yes, he had been arrested for the murder of
Dr. Sturk, and now stood out on bail to answer that charge.' Then
followed some circumstances, one of which, the discovery of a piece of
what was presumed to be the weapon with which the murder was
perpetrated, I have already mentioned. Then came some evidence, curious
but quite clear, to show that the Charles Archer who had died at
Florence was not the Charles Archer who had murdered Beauclerc, but a
gentleman who had served in the army, and had afterwards been for two
years in Italy, in the employment of a London firm who dealt in works of
art, and was actually resident in Italy at the time when the Newmarket
murder occurred, and that the attempt to represent him as the person who
had given evidence against the late Lord Dunoran was an elaborate and
cunning contrivance of the prisoner at the bar. Then came the medical
evidence.

Pell was examined, and delivered only half a dozen learned sentences;
Toole, more at length, made a damaging comparison of the fragment of
iron already mentioned, and the outline of the fractures in the deceased
man's head; and Dillon was questioned generally, and was not
cross-examined. Then came the defence.

The points were, that Sturk was restored to speech by the determined
interposition of the prisoner at the bar, an unlikely thing if he was
ruining himself thereby! That Sturk's brain had been shattered, and not
cleared from hallucinations before he died; that having uttered the
monstrous dream, in all its parts incredible, which was the sole
foundation of the indictment against that every way respectable and
eminent gentleman who stood there, the clerk, Irons, having heard
something of it, had conceived the plan of swearing to the same story,
for the manifest purpose of securing thereby the favour of the young
Lord Dunoran, with whom he had been in conference upon this very subject
without ever once having hinted a syllable against Mr. Paul Dangerfield
until after Doctor Sturk's dream had been divulged; and the idea of
fixing the guilt of Beauclerc's murder upon that gentleman of wealth,
family, and station, occurred to his intriguing and unscrupulous mind.

Mr. Dangerfield, in the dock nodded sometimes, or sneered or smirked
with hollow cheeks, or shook his head in unison with the passing
sentiment of the speaker, directing, through that hot atmosphere, now
darkening into twilight, a quick glance from time to time upon the
aspect of the jury, the weather-gauge of his fate, but altogether with a
manly, sarcastic, and at times a somewhat offended air, as though he
should say, ''Tis somewhat too good a jest that I, Paul Dangerfield,
Esq., a man of fashion, with my known character, and worth nigh two
hundred thousand pounds sterling, should stand here, charged with
murdering a miserable Chapelizod doctor!' The minutes had stolen away;
the judge read his notes by candle-light, and charged, with dry and
cranky emphasis, dead against that man of integrity, fashion, and
guineas; and did not appear a bit disturbed at the idea of hanging him.

When the jury went in he had some soup upon the bench, and sipped it
with great noise. Mr. Dangerfield shook hands with his counsel, and
smirked and whispered. Many people there felt queer, and grew pale in
the suspense, and the general gaze was fixed upon the prisoner with a
coarse curiosity, of which he seemed resolutely unconscious; and five
minutes passed by and a minute or two more--it seemed a very long
time--the minute-hands of the watches hardly got on at all--and then the
door of the jury-room opened, and the gentlemen came stumbling in,
taking off their hats, and silence was called. There was no need; and
the foreman, with a very pale and frightened face, handed down the
paper.

And the simple message sounded through the court--

'Guilty!'

And Mr. Dangerfield bowed, and lifted up a white, smiling countenance,
all over shining now with a slight moisture.

Then there was some whispering among the conductors of the prosecution;
and the leader stood up to say, that, in consequence of a communication
from the law officers in England, where the prisoner was to be arraigned
on a capital indictment, involving serious consequences to others--for
the murder, he meant, of Mr. Beauclerc--the crown wished that he should
stand over for judgment until certain steps in that case had been taken
at the other side. Then the court enquired whether they had considered
so and so; and the leader explained and satisfied his lordship, who made
an order accordingly. And Mr. Dangerfield made a low bow, with a smirk,
to his lordship, and a nod, with the same, to his counsel; and he
turned, and the turnkey and darkness received him.

Mr. Dangerfield, or shall we say the villain, Charles Archer, with
characteristic promptitude and coolness, availed himself of the interval
to try every influence he could once have set in motion, and as it were
to gather his strength for a mighty tussle with the king of terrors,
when his pale fingers should tap at his cell door. I have seen two of
his letters, written with consummate plausibility and adroitness, and
which have given me altogether a very high idea of his powers. But they
were all received with a terrifying coldness or with absolute silence.
There was no reasoning against an intuition. Every human being felt that
the verdict was true, and that the judgment, when it came would be
right: and recoiled from the smiling gentleman, over whose white head
the hempen circle hung like a diabolical glory Dangerfield, who had
something of the Napoleonic faculty of never 'making pictures' to
himself, saw this fact in its literality, and acquiesced in it.

He was a great favourite with the gaoler, whom, so long as he had the
command of his money, he had treated with a frank and convivial
magnificence, and who often sat up to one o'clock with him, and enjoyed
his stories prodigiously, for the sarcastic man of the world lost none
of his amusing qualities: and--the fatigues of his barren correspondence
ended--slept, and eat, and drank, pretty much as usual.

This Giant Despair, who carried the keys at his girdle, did not often
get so swell a pilgrim into his castle, and was secretly flattered by
his familiarity, and cheered by his devilish gaiety, and was quite
willing to make rules bend a little, and the place as pleasant as
possible to his distinguished guest, and give him in fact, all his heart
could desire, except a chance of escape.

'I've one move left--nothing very excellent--but sometimes, you know, a
scurvy card enough will win the trick. Between you and me, my good
friend, I have a thing to tell that 'twill oblige my Lord Dunoran very
much to hear. My Lord Townshend will want his vote. He means to prove
his peerage immediately and he may give a poor devil a lift, you
see--hey?

So next day there came my Lord Dunoran and a magistrate, not Mr.
Lowe--Mr. Dangerfield professed a contempt for him, and preferred any
other. So it was Mr. Armstrong this time, and that is all I know of him.

Lord Dunoran was more pale than usual; indeed he felt like to faint on
coming into the presence of the man who had made his life so
indescribably miserable, and throughout the interview he scarcely spoke
six sentences, and not one word of reproach. The villain was down. It
was enough.

Mr. Dangerfield was, perhaps, a little excited. He talked more volubly
than usual, and once or twice there came a little flush over his pallid
forehead and temples. But, on the whole, he was very much the same
brisk, sardonic talker and polite gentleman whom Mr. Mervyn had so often
discoursed with in Chapelizod. On this occasion, his narrative ran on
uninterruptedly and easily, but full of horrors, like a satanic reverie.

'Upon my honour, Sir,' said Paul Dangerfield, with his head erect, 'I
bear Mr. Lowe no ill-will. He is, you'll excuse me, a thief-catcher by
nature. He can't help it. He thinks he works from duty, public spirit,
and other fine influences; I know it is simply from an irrepressible
instinct. I do assure you, I never yet bore any man the least ill-will.
I've had to remove two or three, not because I hated them--I did not
care a button for any--but because their existence was incompatible with
my safety, which, Sir, is the first thing to me, as yours is to you.
Human laws we respect--ha, ha!--you and I, because they subserve our
convenience, and just so long. When they tend to our destruction, 'tis,
of course, another thing.'

This, it must be allowed, was frank enough; there was no bargain here;
and what ever Mr. Dangerfield's plan might have been, it certainly did
not involve making terms with Lord Dunoran beforehand, or palliating or
disguising what he had done. So on he went.

'I believe in luck, Sir, and there's the sum of my creed. I was wrong in
taking that money from Beauclerc when I did, 'twas in the midst of a
dismal run of ill-fortune. There was nothing unfair in taking it,
though. The man was a cheat. It was not really his, and no one could
tell to whom it belonged; 'twas no more his because I had found it in
his pocket than if I had found it in a barrel on the high seas. I killed
him to prevent his killing me. Precisely the same motive, though in your
case neither so reasonable nor so justifiable, as that on which, in the
name of justice, which means only the collective selfishness of my
fellow-creatures, you design in cool blood to put me publicly to death.
'Tis only that you, gentlemen, think it contributes to your safety.
That's the spirit of human laws. I applaud and I adopt it in my own
case. Pray, Sir' (to Mr. Armstrong), 'do me the honour to try this
snuff, 'tis real French rappee.

'But, Sir, though I have had to do these things, which you or any other
man of nerve would do with a sufficient motive, I never hurt any man
without a necessity for it. My money I've made fairly, though in great
measure by play, and no man can say I ever promised that which I did not
perform. 'Tis quite true I killed Beauclerc in the manner described by
Irons. That was put upon me, and I could not help it. I did right. 'Tis
also true, I killed that scoundrel Glascock, as Irons related. Shortly
after, being in trouble about money and in danger of arrest, I went
abroad, and changed my name and disguised my person.

'At Florence I was surprised to find a letter directed to Charles
Archer. You may suppose it was not agreeable. But, of course, I would
not claim it; and it went after all to him for whom it was intended.
There was actually there a Mr. Charles Archer, dying of a decline. Three
respectable English residents had made his acquaintance, knowing nothing
of him but that he was a sick countryman. When I learned all about it,
I, too, got an introduction to him; and when he died, I prevailed with
one of them to send a note signed by himself and two more to the London
lawyer who was pursuing me, simply stating that Charles Archer had died
in Florence, to their knowledge, they having seen him during his last
illness, and attended his funeral.

'I told them that he had begged me to see this done, as family affairs
made it necessary; 'twas as well to use the event--and they did it
without difficulty. I do not know how the obituary announcement got
into the newspapers--it was not my doing--and naming him as the evidence
in the prosecution of my Lord Dunoran was a great risk, and challenged
contradiction, but none came. Sir Philip Drayton was one of the
signatures, and it satisfied the attorney.

'When I came to Chapelizod, though, I soon found that the devil had not
done with me, and that I was like to have some more unpleasant work on
my hands. I did not know that Irons was above ground, nor he either that
I was living. We had wandered far enough asunder in the interval to make
the chances very many we should never meet again. Yet here we met, and I
knew him, and he me. But he's a nervous man, and whimsical.

'He was afraid of me, and never used his secret to force money from me.
Still it was not pleasant. I did not know but that if I went away he
might tell it. I weighed the matter; 'tis true I thought there might
have come a necessity to deal with him; but I would not engage in
anything of the sort, without an absolute necessity. But Doctor Sturk
was different--a bull-headed, conceited fool. I thought I remembered his
face at Newmarket, and changed as it was, I was right, and learned all
about him from Irons. I saw his mind was at work on me, though he could
not find me out, and I could not well know what course a man like that
might take, or how much he might have seen or remembered. That was not
pleasant either.

'I had taken a whim to marry; there's no need to mention names; but I
supposed I should have met no difficulty with the lady--relying on my
wealth. Had I married, I should have left the country.

'However, it was not to be. It might have been well for all had I never
thought of it. For I'm a man who, when he once places an object before
him, will not give it up without trying. I can wait as well as strike,
and know what's to be got by one and t'other. Well, what I've once
proposed to myself I don't forego, and that helped to hold me where I
was.

'The nature of the beast, Sturk, and his circumstances were dangerous.
'Twas necessary for my safety to make away with him. I tried it by
several ways. I made a quarrel between him and Toole, but somehow it
never came to a duel; and a worse one between him and Nutter, but that
too failed to come to a fight. It was to be, Sir, and my time had come.
What I long suspected arrived, and he told me in his own study he knew
me, and wanted money. The money didn't matter; of that I could spare
abundance, though 'tis the nature of such a tax to swell to
confiscation. But the man who gets a sixpence from you on such terms is
a tyrant and your master, and I can't brook slavery.

'I owed the fellow no ill-will; upon my honour, as a gentleman; I
forgive him, as I hope he has forgiven me. It was all fair he should
try. We can't help our instincts. There's something wolfish in us all. I
was vexed at his d----d folly, though, and sorry to have to put him out
of the way. However, I saw I must be rid of him.

'There was no immediate hurry. I could afford to wait a little. I
thought he would walk home on the night I met him. He had gone into town
in Colonel Strafford's carriage. It returned early in the afternoon
without him. I knew his habits; he dined at Keating's ordinary at four
o'clock; and Mercer, whom he had to speak with, would not see him, on
his bill of exchange business, in his counting-house. Sturk told me so;
and he must wait till half-past five at his lodgings. What he had to say
was satisfactory, and I allowed five minutes for that.

'Then he might come home in a coach. But he was a close-fisted fellow
and loved a shilling; so it was probable he would walk. His usual path
was by the Star Fort, and through the thorn woods between that and the
Magazine. So I met him. I said I was for town, and asked him how he had
fared in his business; and turned with him, walking slowly as though to
hear. I had that loaded whalebone in my pocket, and my sword, but no
pistol. It was not the place for firearms; the noise would have made an
alarm. So I turned sharp upon him and felled him. He knew by an
intuition what was about to happen, for as the blow fell he yelled
"murder." That d----d fellow, Nutter, in the wood at our right, scarce a
hundred yards away, halloed in answer. I had but time to strike him two
blows on the top of his head that might have killed an ox. I felt the
metal sink at the second in his skull, and would have pinked him through
with my sword, but the fellow was close on me, and I thought I knew the
voice for Nutter's. I stole through the bushes swiftly, and got along
into the hollow under the Magazine, and thence on.

'There was a slight fog upon the park, and I met no one. I got across
the park-wall, over the quarry, and so down by the stream at Coyles, and
on to the road near my house. No one was in sight, so I walked down to
Chapelizod to show myself. Near the village tree I met Dr. Toole. I
asked him if Nutter was in the club, and he said no--nor at home, he
believed, for his boy had seen him more than half-an-hour ago leave his
hall door, dressed for the road.

'So I made as if disappointed, and turned back again, assured that
Nutter was the man. I was not easy, for I could not be sure that Sturk
was dead. Had I been allowed a second or two more, I'd have made sure
work of it. Still I was nearly sure. I could not go back now and
finish the business. I could not say whether he lay there any longer,
and if he did, how many men Nutter might have about him by this time.
So, Sir, the cast was made, I could not mend it, and must abide my
fortune be it good or ill.

'Not a servant saw me go out or return. I came in quietly, and went into
my bed-room and lighted a candle. 'Twas a blunder, a blot, but a
thousand to one it was not hit. I washed my hands. There was some blood
on the whalebone, and on my fingers. I rolled the loaded whalebone up in
a red handkerchief, and locked it into my chest of drawers, designing to
destroy it, which I did, so soon as the servants were in bed; and then I
felt a chill and a slight shiver;--'twas only that I was an older man. I
was cool enough, but a strain on the mind was more to me then than
twenty years before. So I drank a dram, and I heard a noise outside my
window. 'Twas then that stupid dog, Cluffe, saw me, as he swears.

'Well, next day Sturk was brought home; Nutter was gone, and the
suspicion attached to him. That was well. But, though Pell pronounced
that he must die without recovering consciousness, and that the trepan
would kill him instantaneously, I had a profound misgiving that he might
recover speech and recollection. I wrote as exact a statement of the
case to my London physician--a very great man--as I could collect, and
had his answer, which agreed exactly with Doctor Pell's. 'Twas agreed on
all hands the trepan would be certain death. Days, weeks, or months--it
mattered not what the interval--no returning glimmer of memory could
light his death-bed. Still, Sir, I presaged evil. He was so long about
dying.

'I'm telling you everything, you see. I offered Irons what would have
been a fortune to him--he was attending occasionally in Sturk's
sick-room, and assisting in dressing his wounds--to watch his
opportunity and smother him with a wet handkerchief. I would have done
it myself afterwards, on the sole opportunity that offered, had I not
been interrupted.

'I engaged, with Mrs. Sturk's approval, Doctor Dillon. I promised him
five hundred guineas to trepan him. That young villain, I could prove,
bled Alderman Sherlock to death to please the alderman's young wife.
Who'd have thought the needy profligate would have hesitated to plunge
his trepan into the brain of a dying man--a corpse, you may say,
already--for five hundred guineas? I was growing feverish under the
protracted suspense. I was haunted by the apprehension of Sturk's
recovering his consciousness and speech, in which case I should have
been reduced to my present rueful situation; and I was resolved to end
that cursed uncertainty.

'When I thought Dillon had forgot his appointment in his swinish vices,
I turned my mind another way. I resolved to leave Sturk to nature, and
clench the case against Nutter, by evidence I would have compelled Irons
to swear. As it turned out, that would have been the better way. Had
Sturk died without speaking, and Nutter hanged for his death, the
question could have opened no more, and Irons would have been nailed to
my interest.

'I viewed the problem every way. I saw the danger from the first, and
provided many expedients, which, one after the other, fortune
frustrated. I can't confidently say even now that it would have been
wiser to leave Sturk to die, as the doctors said he must. I had a
foreboding, in spite of all they could say, he would wake up before he
died and denounce me. If 'twas a mistake, 'twas a fated one, and I could
not help it.

'So, Sir, you see I've nothing to blame myself for--though all has
broken down.

'I guessed when I heard the sound at the hall-door of my house that
Sturk or Irons had spoken, and that they were come to take me. Had I
broken through them, I might have made my escape. It was long odds
against me, but still I had a chance--that's all. And the matter
affecting my Lord Dunoran's innocence, I'm ready to swear, if it can
serve his son--having been the undesigned cause of some misfortunes to
you, my lord, in my lifetime.'

Lord Dunoran said nothing, he only bowed his head.

So Dangerfield, when his statement respecting the murder of Beauclerc
had been placed clearly in writing, made oath of its truth, and
immediately when this was over (he had, while they were preparing the
statement, been walking up and down his flagged chamber), he grew all on
a sudden weak, and then very flushed, and they thought he was about to
take a fit; but speedily he recovered himself, and in five minutes' time
was much as he had been at the commencement.

After my lord and Mr. Armstrong went away, he had the gaoler with him,
and seemed very sanguine about getting his pardon, and was very brisk
and chatty, and said he'd prepare his petition in the morning, and got
in large paper for drafting it on, and said, 'I suppose at the close of
this commission they will bring me up for judgment; that will be the day
after to-morrow, and I must have my petition ready.' And he talked away
like a man who had got a care off his mind, and is in high spirits; and
when grinning, beetle-browed Giant Despair shook his hand, and wished
him luck at parting, he stopped him, laying his white hand upon his
herculean arm, and, said he, 'I've a point to urge they don't suspect.
I'm sure of my liberty; what do you think of that--hey?' and he laughed.
'And when I get away what do you say to leaving this place and coming
after me? Upon my life, you must, Sir. I like you, and if you don't, rot
me, but I'll come and take you away myself.'

So they parted in a sprightly, genial way; and in the morning the
turnkey called the gaoler up at an unseasonable hour, and told him that
Mr. Dangerfield was dead.

The gaoler lay in the passage outside the prisoner's cell, with his bed
across the door, which was locked, and visited him at certain intervals.
The first time he went in there was nothing remarkable. It was but
half-an-hour after the gaoler had left. Mr. Dangerfield, for so he
chose to be called, was dozing very quietly in his bed, and just opened
his eyes, and nodded on awaking, as though he would say, 'Here I am,'
but did not speak.

When, three hours later, the officer entered, having lighted his candle
at the lamp, he instantly recoiled. 'The room felt so queer,' said he,
'I thought I'd a fainted, and I drew back. I tried it again a bit
further in, and 'twas worse, and the candle almost went out--'twas as if
the devil was there. I drew back quick, and I called the prisoner, but
no word was there. Then I locks the door, and called Michael; and when
he came we called the prisoner again, but to no purpose. Then we opened
the door, and I made a rush, and smashed the glass of the window to let
in air. We had to wait outside a good while before we could venture in;
and when we did, there he was lying like a man asleep in his bed, with
his nightcap on, and his hand under his cheek, and he smiling down on
the flags, very sly, like a man who has won something cleverly. He was
dead, and his limbs cold by this time.'

There was an inquest. Mr. Dangerfield 'looked very composed in death,'
says an old letter, and he lay 'very like sleep,' in his bed, 'his
fingers under his cheek and temple,' with the countenance turned 'a
little downward, as if looking upon something on the floor,' with an
'ironical smile;' so that the ineffaceable lines of sarcasm, I suppose,
were traceable upon that jaundiced mask.

Some said it was a heart disease, and others an exhalation from the
prison floor. He was dead, that was all the jury could say for certain,
and they found 'twas 'by a visitation of God.' The gaoler, being a
superstitious fellow, was plaguily nervous about Mr. Dangerfield's
valediction, and took clerical advice upon it, and for several months
after became a very serious and ascetic character; and I do believe that
the words were spoken in reality with that sinister jocularity in which
his wit sported like church-yard meteors, when crimes and horrors were
most in his mind.

The niece of this gaoler said she well remembered her uncle, when a very
old man, three years before the rebellion, relating that Mr. Dangerfield
came by his death in consequence of some charcoal in a warming pan he
had prevailed on him to allow him for his bed, he having complained of
cold. He got it with a design to make away with himself, and it was
forgotten in the room. He placed it under the bed, and waited until the
first call of the turnkey was over, and then he stuffed his surtout into
the flue of the small fire-place, which afforded the only ventilation of
his cell, and so was smothered. It was not till the winter following
that the gaoler discovered, on lighting a fire there, that the chimney
was stopped. He had a misgiving about the charcoal before, and now he
was certain. Of course, he said nothing about his suspicions at first,
nor of his discovery afterwards.

So, sometimes in my musings, when I hear of clever young fellows taking
to wild courses, and audaciously rushing--where good Christians pray
they may not be led--into temptation, there rises before me, with
towering forehead and scoffing face, a white image smoking his pipe
grimly by a plutonic fire; and I remember the words of the son of
Sirach--'The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, neither at any time
the counsel of sinners prudence.'

Mr. Irons, of course, left Chapelizod. He took with him the hundred
guineas which Mr. Dangerfield had given him, as also, it was said, a
handsome addition made to that fund by open-handed Dr. Walsingham; but
somehow, being much pressed for time, he forgot good Mistress Irons, who
remained behind and let lodgings pretty much as usual, and never heard
from that time forth anything very distinct about him; and latterly it
was thought was, on the whole, afraid rather than desirous of his
turning up again.

Doctor Toole, indeed, related in his own fashion, at the Phoenix, some
years later, a rumour which, however, may have turned out to be no
better than smoke.

'News of Zekiel, by Jove! The prophet was found, Sir, with a friend in
the neighbourhood of Hounslow, with a brace of pistols, a mask, a
handful of slugs, and a powder-horn in his pocket, which he first gave
to a constable, and then made his compliments to a justice o' the peace,
who gave him and his friend a note of commendation to my Lord Chief
Justice, and his lordship took such a fancy to both that, by George, he
sent them in a procession in his best one-horse coach, with a guard of
honour and a chaplain, the high-sheriff dutifully attending, through the
City, where, by the king's commands, they were invested with the grand
collar of the order of the hempen cravat, Sir, and with such an
attention to their comfort they were not required to descend from their
carriage, by George, and when it drove away they remained in an easy,
genteel posture, with their hands behind their backs, in a sort of an
ecstasy, and showed their good humour by dancing a reel together with
singular lightness and agility, and keeping it up till they were both
out of breath, when they remained quiet for about half an hour to cool,
and then went off to pay their respects to the President of the College
of Surgeons,' and so forth; but I don't think Irons had pluck for a
highwayman, and I can't, therefore, altogether, believe the story.

We all know Aunt Rebecca pretty well by this time. And looking back upon
her rigorous treatment of Puddock, recorded in past chapters of this
tale, I think I can now refer it all to its true source.

She was queer, quarrelsome, and sometimes nearly intolerable; but she
was generous and off-handed, and made a settlement, reserving only a
life interest, and nearly all afterwards to Puddock.

'But in a marriage settlement,' said the attorney (so they called
themselves in those days), 'it is usual; and here his tone became so
gentle that I can't say positively what he uttered.'

'Oh--a--that,' she said, 'a--well, you can speak to Lieutenant
Puddock, if you wish. I only say for myself a life estate; Lieutenant
Puddock can deal with the remainder as he pleases.' And Aunt Rebecca
actually blushed a pretty little pink blush. I believe she did not think
there was much practical utility in the attorney's suggestion, and if an
angel in her hearing had said of her what he once said of Sarah, she
would not have laughed indeed, but I think she would have shaken her
head.

She was twenty years and upwards his senior; but I don't know which
survived the other, for in this life the battle is not always to the
strong.

Their wedding was a very quiet affair, and the talk of the village was
soon directed from it to the approaching splendours of the union of Miss
Gertrude and my Lord Dunoran.








The old minutes of the Irish House of Lords can better explain than I
the parliamentary process by which all the consequences of the judgment
against the late Lord Dunoran were abrogated, as respected his son. An
ancient name rescued from the shadow of dishonour, and still greater
estates, made my lord and lady as happy as things can. So for the
recluse Mervyn, and the fair Gertrude Chattesworth, our story ends like
a fairy tale.

A wedding in those days was a celebration and a feast; and it was deemed
fitting that the union of Gertrude Chattesworth and the youthful Lord
Dunoran should await the public vindication of his family, and the
authentic restoration of all their rights and possessions. On the eve of
this happy day, leaning on the youthful arm of kindly Dan Loftus, there
came a figure not seen there for many months before, very much changed,
grown, oh, how old! It was the good rector, who asked to see Miss
Gertrude.

And so when he entered the room, she ran to meet him with a little cry;
and she threw her arms about his neck and sobbed a good deal on that
old, cassocked shoulder, and longed to ask him to let her be as a
daughter to him. But he understood her and, after a while, he wished her
joy, very kindly. And my Lord Dunoran came in, and was very glad to see
him, and very tender and reverent too; and the good doctor, as he could
not be at the wedding, wished to say a word 'on the eve of the great
change which my dear young friend--little Gertie, we used to call
her--is about to make.' And so he talked to them both. It was an
affectionate little homily, and went on something in this sort--

'But I need not say how honourable an estate it is, only, my lord, you
will always remember your wooing is not over with your wedding. As you
did first choose your love, you must hereafter love your choice. In
Solomon's Song, the Redeemer the bridegroom, and the Church His spouse,
one calls the other "love," to show that though both did not honour
alike, yet both should love alike.

'And always be kind, and the kinder the more her weakness needs it.
Elkanah says to his wife, "Am not I better unto thee than ten sons?" As
though he favoured her more for that which she thought herself despised.
So a good husband will not love his wife less, but comfort her more for
her infirmities, as this man did, that she may bear with his infirmities
too. And if she be jealous--ay, they will be jealous--'

He spoke in a reverie, with a sad fond look, not a smile, but something
like a smile, and a little pensive shake of the head; he was thinking,
perhaps, of very old times. And 'my lord' glanced with a sly smile at
Gertrude, who was looking on the carpet with, I think, a blush, and I'm
sure saw my lord's glance seeking hers, but made as though she did not.

'If she be jealous, her jealousy, you know, is still the measure of her
love. Bless God that he hath made thee to her so dear a treasure that
she cannot hide her fears and trouble lest she should lose even a
portion of thy love; and let thy heart thank her too.

'And if the husband would reprove her, it must be in such a mood as if
he did chide with himself, and his words like Jonathan's arrows, which
were not shot to hurt but to give warning. She must have no words but
loving words from thee. She is come to thee as to a sanctuary to defend
her from hurt, and canst thou hurt her thyself? Does the king trample
his crown? Solomon calls the wife the crown of her husband; therefore,
he who despiseth her woundeth his own honour. I am resolved to honour
virtue in what sex soever I find it.'

The doctor was speaking this like a soliloquy, slowly, and looking on
the floor.

'And I think in general I shall find it more in women than in men.'

Here the young people exchanged another smile, and the doctor looked up
and went on. 'Ay--though weaker and more infirmly guarded, I believe
they are better; for everyone is so much the better, by how much he
comes nearer to God; and man in nothing is more like him than in being
merciful. Yet woman is far more merciful than man. God is said to be
love; and I am sure in that quality woman everywhere transcends.'

The doctor's serious discourses were a mosaic of old divines and
essayists, and Greek and Latin authors, as the writings of the Apostolic
Fathers are, in a great measure, a tesselation of holy writ. He assumed
that everybody knew where to find them. His business was only to repeat
the truth wherever gleaned. So I can't tell how much was the doctor's
and how much theirs.

And when he had done upon this theme, and had risen to take leave, he
said in his gentle and simple way--

'And I brought you a little present--a necklace and
ear-rings--old-fashioned, I'm afraid--they were my dear mother's
diamonds, and were to have been--'

Here there was a little pause--they knew what was in his mind--and he
dried his eyes quickly.

'And won't you take them, Gertie, for poor little Lily's keepsake? And
so--well, well--little Gerty--I taught you your catechism--dear, dear!
Little Gerty going to be married! And may God Almighty bless her to you,
and you to her, with length of days, and all goodness; and with
children, the inheritors of your fair forms, and all your graces, to
gladden your home with love and duty, and to close your eyes at last
with tender reverence; and to walk after you, when your time is over, in
the same happy and honourable paths.'

Miss Gertrude was crying, and with two quick little steps she took his
knotted old hand, and kissed it fervently and said--

'I thank you, Sir, you've always been so good to me; I wish I could tell
you--and won't you come to us, Sir, and see us very often--when we are
settled--and bring good Mr. Loftus, and dear old Sally; and thank you,
Sir, with all my heart, for your beautiful presents, and for your noble
advice, Sir, which I will never forget, and for your blessing, and I
wish I could show you how very much I love and reverence you.'

And my Lord Dunoran, though he was smiling, looked as if he had been
crying too. But men, you know, don't like to be detected in that
weakness, though everybody knows there are moments when bonus Homerus
dormitat.

Good Doctor Walsingham made Dan Loftus his curate. But when in the
course of time a day came when the old rector was to meet his
parishioners no more, and the parish was vacant, I do not hear that
honest Dan succeeded to it. Indeed I'm afraid that it needs sometimes a
spice of the devil, or at least of the world, to get on in the Church.
But Lord Dunoran took him with him on the embassage to Lisbon, and
afterwards he remained in his household as his domestic chaplain, much
beloved and respected. And there he had entire command of his
lordship's fine library, and compiled and composed, and did everything
but publish and marry.

In due time the fair Magnolia made the amorous and formidable O'Flaherty
happy. Single blessedness was not for her, and it is due to her to say,
she turned out one of the best house-wives in Chapelizod, and made the
fireworker account for every shilling of his pay and other revenues, and
managed the commissariat and all other departments to admiration. She
cured her lord very nearly of boozing, and altogether of duelling. One
combat only he fought after his marriage, and it was rumoured that the
blooming Magnolia actually chastised the gigantic delinquent with her
own fair hand. That, however, I don't believe. But unquestionably she
did, in other ways, lead the contumacious warrior so miserable a life
for some months after that, as he averred to the major, with tears in
his eyes, it would have been 'more to his teeste to have been shot on
the occasion.' At first, of course, the fireworker showed fight, and
sometimes broke loose altogether; but in the end 'his mouth was made,'
his paces formed, and he became a very serviceable and willing animal.
But if she was strong she was also generous, and very popular for her
good nature and fearlessness. And they made a very happy, as well as a
comely couple. And many handsome children were nursed at her fair
breast, and drew many a Celtic virtue from that kindly fountain and one
of the finest grenadiers who lay in his red coat and sash within the
French lines on the field of Waterloo, in that great bivouac which knows
no reveille save the last trumpet, was a scion of that fine military
stock.

At length came the day of the nuptials--a grand day for Belmont--a grand
day for the town. Half-a-dozen flags were up and floating in the
autumnal sun. The band of the Royal Irish Artillery played noble and
cheering strains upon the lawns of Belmont. There were pipers and
fiddlers beside for rustic merry-makers under the poplars. Barrels of
strong ale and sparkling cider were broached on the grass; and plenty of
substantial fare kept the knives and forks clattering under the marquees
by the hedgerow. The rude and hospitable feudalism of old times had not
died out yet; marriage being an honourable estate, the bride and
bridegroom did not steal away in a travelling carriage, trying to pass
for something else, to unknown regions, but remained courageously upon
the premises, the central figures of a genial gala.

Need I describe the wedding? It always seems to me that I saw it, and
see it still, I've heard the old folk talk it over so often. The
reader's fancy will take that business off my hands. 'What's a play
without a marriage? and what is a marriage if one sees nothing of it?'
says Sir Roger in Gay's tragi-comic pastoral. 'Let him have his humour,
but set the doors wide open, that we may see how all goes on.'

(Sir Roger at the door, pointing.)

'So natural! d'ye see now, neighbours? The ring, i'faith. To have and to
hold! Right again; well play'd, doctor; well play'd, son Thomas. Come,
come, I'm satisfied. Now for the fiddles and dances.'

And so are we--now, then, for the fiddles and dances! And let those who
love to foot it keep it up--after sack-posset and stocking thrown--till
two o'clock i' the morning; and the elder folk, and such as are 'happy
thinking,' get home betimes; and smiling still, get to their beds; and
with hearty laughter--as it were mellowed by distance--still in their
ears, and the cheery scrape of the fiddle, all pervading, still humming
on; and the pleasant scuffle of light feet, and with kindly ancient
faces, and blushing young ones all round in airy portraiture; grinning,
roguish, faithful, fuddled old servants, beflowered and liveried,
pronouncing benedictions at the foot of the stairs, and pocketing their
vails; and buxom maids in their best Sunday finery, giggling and
staring, with eyes starting out of their heads, at the capering
'quality,', through the half-open doors; let us try to remember the
'sentiment' delivered by that ridiculous dog, Tom Toole, after supper,
at which we all laughed so heartily. And, ah! there were some pretty
faces that ought to have been there--faces that were pleasant to see,
but that won't smile or blush any more; and I missed them, though I said
nothing. And so, altogether, it went down among my pleasant
recollections, and I think will always remain so, for it was all kindly,
and had its root in the heart; and the affections were up and stirring,
and mixed in the dance with the graces, and shook hands kindly with old
father Bacchus; and so I pull my nightcap about my ears, drop the
extinguisher on the candle, and wish you all pleasant dreams.



